--- Page 1 ---

View
Online
Export
CitationRESEARCH ARTICLE| OCTOBER 31 2018
Surface recombination in the direct simulation Monte Carlo
method  
Alexandra N. Molchanova ; Alexander V . Kashkovsky  
 ; Yevgeniy A. Bondar  
Physics of Fluids  30, 107105 (2018)
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5048353
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Effect of surface catalycity on high-altitude aerothermodynamics of reentry vehicles
AIP Conf. Proc.  (October 2016)
 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 2 ---
PHYSICS OF FLUIDS 30, 107105 (2018)
Surface recombination in the direct simulation Monte Carlo method
Alexandra N. Molchanova,a)Alexander V. Kashkovsky, and Yevgeniy A. Bondar
Khristianovich Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics SB RAS, 63090 Novosibirsk, Russia
(Received 13 July 2018; accepted 4 October 2018; published online 31 October 2018)
This work is aimed at the development of surface chemistry models for the Direct Simulation Monte
Carlo (DSMC) method applicable to non-equilibrium high-temperature ﬂows about reentry vehicles.
Probabilities of adsorption and Eley-Rideal recombination dependent on individual properties of
each particular molecule and frequencies of desorption and Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
are determined from macroscopic reaction rate data. Various macroscopic ﬁnite-rate surface reaction
sets are used for the construction of the DSMC surface recombination models for the reaction cured
glass and -alumina surfaces. The models are implemented in the SMILE++ software system for
DSMC computations, and detailed veriﬁcation of the code is performed. The proposed approach is
used to study the effects of surface recombination on the aerothermodynamics of a blunt body at
high-altitude reentry conditions. Published by AIP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5048353
I. INTRODUCTION
At the early stages of the space vehicle aeroshell design, it
is necessary to accurately predict the aerothermodynamic char-
acteristics of the vehicle along its reentry trajectory (see, e.g.,
Ref. 1). A typical feature of the ﬂow around the reentry vehi-
cle is a signiﬁcant degree of thermochemical non-equilibrium.
Experimental modeling of high-altitude non-equilibrium ﬂight
environment in ground-based facilities is extremely difﬁcult;
therefore, numerical modeling is the main tool for study-
ing such ﬂows. There are two high-ﬁdelity approaches to
numerical simulation of gas ﬂows: continuum and kinetic.
The continuum approach based on the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions is inapplicable at high ﬂight altitudes where the mean
free path of molecules is comparable with the size of the vehi-
cle, and the kinetic approach should be used for modeling
such ﬂows. The best-developed and efﬁcient implementation
of the kinetic approach is the Direct Simulation Monte Carlo
(DSMC) method (Ref. 2).
The magnitude of the heat ﬂux onto the reentry vehicle
surface is largely determined by physical and chemical pro-
cesses in the shock layer and on the surface of the thermal
protection system (TPS). Reactions of dissociation of free-
stream molecules into atoms and simpler molecules proceed
in the high-temperature viscous shock layer on the spacecraft
surface, which leads to cooling of the ﬂow. Simultaneously,
however, the spacecraft surface serves as a catalyst for exother-
mic reverse reactions of recombination, which can severalfold
increase the heat ﬂux to the vehicle (Refs. 3 and 4).
Much attention has been always paid to the modeling of
gas-phase chemical processes in computational ﬂuid dynamics
(CFD) within the framework of both the continuum and kinetic
approaches. Codes based on the continuum approach (e.g.,
Refs. 5–11) usually involve chemical reaction models that
take into account the reaction rate dependence on translational
and vibrational temperature (the model developed by Park,
a)Electronic mail: molchanova@itam.nsc.ru.Ref. 12, is used most frequently). The most popular model
for real engineering applications of the DSMC method is the
total collision energy model (TCE, Refs. 13 and 2), where data
on the macroscopic reaction rate under thermal equilibrium are
used for determining the probability of the chemical reaction
between two molecules (see also the recent modiﬁcation of the
model in Refs. 14 and 15). This phenomenological approach
was generalized in order to take into account the effects of
vibration dissociation favoring (see, e.g., Refs. 16–23). The
main advantage of the phenomenological approach to model-
ing chemical reactions is its relative simplicity, possibility of
easy extension to complex multispecies mixtures, and com-
patibility of such models with macroscopic models used in
continuum CFD. There are many papers dealing with the val-
idation of DSMC gas-phase chemistry models against data of
ground-based and ﬂight experiments (see, e.g., Refs. 16 and
24–32).
It should be noted that surface chemical processes at the
atmospheric reentry conditions have been studied to a much
smaller extent than gas-phase reactions, and the degree of
uncertainty associated with modeling these processes is much
higher. In continuum gas dynamics, surface processes can be
taken into account with different degrees of detail: from a sim-
ple variant of a constant recombination probability (the value
of this parameter equal to zero and unity correspond to the
limiting cases of noncatalytic and perfectly catalytic walls,
respectively) to sufﬁciently complex ﬁnite-rate surface chem-
istry models, which take into account the kinetics of various
physical and chemical processes on the spacecraft surface. A
number of models of surface chemical reactions with differ-
ent levels of detail and accuracy have been proposed in the
framework of the continuum approach (Refs. 4 and 33–40).
These models include those based on empirical data as well
as some modern models that employ the results of ab initio
calculations.
As for the kinetic approach, and particularly the DSMC
method, very little attention has been paid to the particle mod-
eling of spacecraft aerothermodynamics taking into account
1070-6631/2018/30(10)/107105/17/ $30.00 30, 107105-1 Published by AIP Publishing.
 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 3 ---
107105-2 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
surface catalytic processes. There are few publications deal-
ing with this topic (Refs. 41–46); moreover, the inﬂuence of
heterogeneous chemical reactions on high-altitude aerother-
modynamics of space vehicles has not been studied by the
DSMC method almost at all.
The principal goal of the present study is to provide
researchers and engineers who use the DSMC method with
an approach to modeling surface catalytic processes, which
could be used in real engineering applications and could simul-
taneously ensure the level of detail equal to or greater than
the conventional DSMC models of gas-phase chemical reac-
tions. This paper describes activities that continue and extend
the research started in Refs. 47 and 48. The main idea is to
construct DSMC surface chemistry models based on detailed
ﬁnite-rate macroscopic surface reaction sets. All the DSMC
model parameters that determine the microscopic probabilities
of the processes are obtained from the macroscopic reaction
rate coefﬁcients. In a certain sense, this approach is an exten-
sion of that used in the TCE model to surface reactions. This
approach to surface chemistry modeling was partially devel-
oped in Ref. 43. A pioneering general method of constructing
DSMC surface chemistry models on the basis of an almost
arbitrary macroscopic ﬁnite-rate surface reaction set including
various surface processes (adsorption, desorption, Eley-Rideal
and Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination reactions, etc.) is
proposed in this paper.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II provides
the necessary basic information on heterogeneous catalytic
processes. The mathematical approach to obtaining micro-
scopic parameters of DSMC surface chemistry models on the
basis of prescribed macroscopic reaction rate coefﬁcients for
each type of the surface process separately is formulated in
Sec. III, where general issues of implementation of the resul-
tant models in the DSMC code are brieﬂy described as well.
Section IV describes some examples of various materials used
for the thermal protection of space vehicles for which ﬁnite-
rate macroscopic surface reaction sets in air are available in
the literature; DSMC surface chemistry models are developed
for these materials on the basis of the proposed approach. Sec-
tion V deals with veriﬁcation of the developed DSMC surface
chemistry models implemented into the SMILE++ software
system (Refs. 49 and 50) for numerical studies of aerothermo-
dynamic problems on multiprocessor computers, developed
in Russia at the Khristianovich Institute of Theoretical and
Applied Mechanics (ITAM), which is an upgraded modiﬁca-
tion of the well-known SMILE system (Ref. 51). An example
of the ﬂow around a blunt body under atmospheric reentry
conditions calculated with the use of the developed models
of surface catalytic processes is considered at the end of the
paper.
II. HETEROGENEOUS PROCESSES
A necessary stage for heterogeneous catalysis is adsorp-
tion of particles (atoms or molecules) on surface sites (it can
be various crystalline lattice defects). Adsorbed particles can
spontaneously leave the surface (the so-called desorption) and
react with each other or with gas-phase particles collidingTABLE I. Elementary surface processes. Reproduced with permission from
Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016
AIP Publishing LLC.
Impact mechanisms
Adsorption A+S!AS
Eley-Rideal recombination AS+B!AB+S
Dissociative adsorption AB+S!AS+B
Surface mechanisms
Desorption AS!A+S
Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination AS+BS!AB+ 2S
with the surface. As the result of these processes, the surface
coverage is changed and new particles are produced.
Elementary processes typical of heterogeneous catalysis
are listed in Table I. AandBdenote atoms or molecules, S
is the surface site where adsorption occurs, and the subscript
Sdenotes the particles adsorbed by the surface. All surface
processes can be divided into two groups: impact mecha-
nisms , which involve gas-phase particles colliding with the
surface, and surface mechanisms , which involve only parti-
cles adsorbed by the surface. These processes are illustrated
in Fig. 1.
Heterogeneous processes in the macroscopic description
are characterized by the reaction rate coefﬁcients K(T). The
dependence of these coefﬁcients on the temperature Tis
usually assumed to be in the Arrhenius form
K(T)=ATbexp 
 Ea
kT!
, (1)
where kis the Boltzmann constant and Eais the reaction energy
barrier. These coefﬁcients are different for different surface
materials.
Heterogeneous processes in continuum CFD (e.g., based
on Navier-Stokes equations) are usually taken into account
through boundary conditions using the catalytic recombination
coefﬁcient, also referred to as the probability of recombina-
tion. It is equal to the fraction of all particles incident onto
the surface and participating in heterogeneous recombination
reactions, i.e.,
=Jreac
J, (2)
where Jis the total ﬂux of particles onto the surface and Jreacis
the ﬂux of particles incident onto the surface and taking part in
recombination reactions, i.e., in the Eley-Rideal or Langmuir-
Hinshelwood recombination. This coefﬁcient can be divided
into two parts deﬁning the Eley-Rideal recombination coef-
ﬁcientERand the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
coefﬁcientLH, respectively (clearly, =ER+LH). Under
certain assumptions, can be determined from the reaction
rate constants (1) of all processes involved in heterogeneous
catalysis.
Note that there are various options of reaction schemes
for heterogeneous catalytic processes, and only one example
is presented in Table I. In other schemes, some of these pro-
cesses can be neglected or included in a slightly different form;
for example, in the Langmuir-Hinshelwood or Eley-Rideal 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 4 ---
107105-3 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
FIG. 1. Surface processes.
recombination, the resulting molecule ABcan remain adsorbed
on the surface after the reaction (i.e., ABS); another possible
variant is the adsorption of both resulting atoms (i.e., a reac-
tion reverse to the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination is
included) in the case of dissociative adsorption.
III. APPROACH TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF DSMC MODELS
In sets of macroscopic surface reaction, it is necessary to
specify the list of elementary surface processes and the cor-
responding reaction rate coefﬁcients. In the present work, we
propose to obtain all the parameters required for the DSMC
surface chemistry modeling (such as probabilities dependent
on the properties of an individual particle) on the basis of
macroscopic data in the form of reaction rate coefﬁcients for
each surface process. Thus, we use the information contained
in macroscopic surface reaction sets to develop DSMC surface
chemistry models .The approach to the extraction of DSMC
parameters from macroscopic ones will be proposed in this
section. The models described below are applicable to any
implementation of the DSMC method.
In the procedure of obtaining the microscopic properties
from the macroscopic ones, we assume the molecular veloc-
ity distribution function in the vicinity of the surface to be
equilibrium. This assumption is similar to those made in the
total collsion energy model of gas-phase reactions. It also
seems to be reasonable for the surface processes because the
considered macroscopic models are applicable to the contin-
uum ﬂow regime where the distribution function is close to
equilibrium.
We assume that the body surface is presented in the DSMC
computations as a set of elements of a known area, which
are small as compared to the macroscopic parameter gra-
dient length scale (in the direction parallel to the surface).
The approach is different for surface and impact mechanisms;
therefore, these processes will be considered separately.
A. Surface mechanisms
Surface mechanisms involve only particles adsorbed on
the surface. Let us consider a certain process Pthat involves
adsorbed particles AS. The surface number density of adsorbedparticles nASchanges according to the equation
dnAS
dt= KPnR, (3)
where KPis the reaction rate coefﬁcient of the process Pand
nRis the surface number density of a reagent or reagents (the
number of reagents depends on the reaction type under consid-
eration). The frequency of the process Pcan be determined
from this equation. Assuming that the elementary events of the
process Pfollow the Poisson process and hence time tpuntil
the next elementary event follows the exponential distribution,
we can sample this time in the DSMC using the formula
tP= ln(Rn)
P, (4)
where Rnis a random number between 0 and 1. Such an
approach is used in the null-collision (Refs. 52 and 53)
and majorant frequency schemes (Ref. 54) for Monte Carlo
simulation of gases and plasmas.
1. Desorption
Let us consider the desorption reaction
AS!A+S, (5)
where Ais an arbitrary particle (an atom or a molecule).
Equation (3) characterizing a change in the number density of
adsorbed particles nASis rewritten for the desorption process
as
dnAS
dt= KdesnAS. (6)
Desorption is an individual process, i.e., it does not involve
other adsorbed particles. The frequency of desorption per one
particle is
des=Kdes. (7)
The characteristic time of desorption here is the mean lifetime
of a particle ASon the surface. The time spent by each adsorbed
particle on the surface can be sampled using the formula (4)
as
= ln(Rn)
Kdes. (8)
For each particle that appears on the surface in a DSMC
calculation after the adsorption process or after the Langmuir-
Hinshelwood recombination, the lifetime of this particle on
the surface is sampled with the formula (8). After this time, 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 5 ---
107105-4 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
the particle should be desorbed from the surface: desorption
is performed at the end of each time step by checking the time
spent on the surface for each adsorbed particle. The desorbed
particle that moved to the gas phase is assumed to be reﬂected
diffusely from the surface with the distribution corresponding
to the wall temperature Tw.
2. Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
Let us consider the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombina-
tion
AS+BS!AB+ 2S, (9)
where AandBare arbitrary atoms (or molecules) and ABis a
corresponding molecule.
Equation (3) characterizing a change in the number den-
sity of adsorbed particles is rewritten for the Langmuir-
Hinshelwood recombination as
dnAS
dt=dnBS
dt= KLHnASnBS. (10)
The frequency ˜ LHof real Langmuir-Hinshelwood reac-
tions, which is the number of reactions per unit time, can be
derived from formula (10) in the following way:
˜LH=KLHnASnBSSe. (11)
Seis the area of the surface element, on which the reaction is
considered. Particles on the surface interact with each other
independently of their location on the surface.
Applying the standard majorant frequency scheme
(Ref. 54) of the DSMC method and assuming equal recombi-
nation probabilities for all the pairs of particles adsorbed on the
surface element with the area Se, we can rewrite the previous
formula (11) in terms of model particles, i.e., obtain the fre-
quencyLHof the Langmuir-Hinshelwood reactions between
model particles
LH=˜LH1
FN=KLHNASNBSFN2
Se2Se1
FN=KLHNASNBSFN
Se,
(12)
where FNis the number of real particles represented by one
model particle in the DSMC method and NASandNBSare the
number of model particles of respective species adsorbed on
the surface element with the area Se.
For the special case of the reagents of the same species
AS+AS!A2+ 2S, one obtains
LH=˜LH1
FN=1
2KLHNAS NAS 1FN2
Se2Se1
FN
=1
2KLHNAS NAS 1FN
Se. (13)
Applying formula (4), we can sample the time between
the consecutive model Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
events from the exponential distribution
tLH= ln(Rn)
LH. (14)
The frequency should be recalculated and the time
between the events should be resampled each time the num-
ber of adsorbed molecules of any reacting species is changed.
The Langmuir-Hinshelwood reactions that occur on thesurface during the DSMC time step tare performed at the
end of each time step on each surface element consecutively.
The resulting molecule that is the product of the
Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination can stay adsorbed on
the surface or move to the gas phase after the reaction. In
the ﬁrst case, the recombination energy Erecomb produced in
the reaction is completely accommodated by the surface, i.e.,
contributes to the heat ﬂux to the surface. In the second case,
different degrees of recombination energy accommodation can
be considered. In the case of complete accommodation, similar
to the ﬁrst case, the entire energy contributes to the heat ﬂux,
whereas the molecule that is the reaction product is diffusely
reﬂected with the distribution of all energy modes correspond-
ing to the wall temperature Tw. In the case of incomplete
accommodation of recombination energy, some part of this
energy contributes to the heat ﬂux, whereas the remaining part
should be added to the energy of the reﬂected molecule that is
the reaction product.
The degree of accommodation of the chemical energy on
the surface has been addressed in several experimental and the-
oretical studies (see, e.g., Refs. 55 and 56). It should be noted
that the Larsen-Borgnakke approach (Ref. 57) can be naturally
used for the energy distribution between the translational, rota-
tional, and vibrational modes in the framework of the present
approach. In the present paper, we consider only the case of
complete accommodation of recombination energy. As it has
been pointed out above, the present DSMC approach is based
on a macroscopic ﬁnite-rate surface recombination models. As
was stated in the recent review (Ref. 58), these macroscopic
models do not explicitly address energy accommodation. Nor-
mally, the complete energy accommodation is assumed and
thus the predicted heating rate for a particular surface chem-
istry model is maximized. The present paper follows the same
logic and one should consider the present DSMC results on the
heating rate as the maximum possible value for the particular
reaction mechanism. The question of incomplete accommoda-
tion of the recombination energy within the proposed DSMC
approach should be addressed in the further studies.
B. Impact mechanisms
Impact mechanisms involve particles ASadsorbed on the
surface and gas-phase particles Bcolliding with this surface.
Therefore, the DSMC model parameters of interest have to
depend on the individual properties of the particle Bthat arrives
from the gas phase as well as on the surface density nASof
adsorbed particles AS. For impact mechanisms, the micro-
scopic probabilities of the processes will be determined in this
section.
Let us consider a certain impact process that involves a
gas-phase particle Bwith a velocity Vcolliding with the sur-
face. The microscopic probability Pof the process is assumed
to depend on the velocity component Vnnormal to the sur-
face. Then the macroscopic probability of this process ¯P,
which depends on the gas temperature Tg, can be expressed as
the average of the microscopic probability Pin the following
manner:
¯P
Tg
=s1
0P(Vn)Vnf
Vn,Tg
dVn
s1
0Vnf
Vn,Tg
dVn. (15) 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 6 ---
107105-5 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
Let us assume that the distribution function f(Vn,Tg) is at
equilibrium
f
Vn,Tg
= mB
2kTg!1
2
exp 
 mBVn2
2kTg!
. (16)
Applying the change of variables
8>><>>:"=mB
2kTg
'=Vn2,8><>:Tg=mB
2k"
Vn='1
2, (17)
we can rewrite formula (15) as
1
"¯PmB
2k"
=1
0P
'1
2
exp( '")d'=L
P
'1
2
, (18)
where Lis the Laplace transform, which converts the function
depending on the variable 'to a function depending on the
variable". Therefore, the microscopic probability Pof the
process can be expressed through the macroscopic probability
¯Pusing the inverse Laplace transform as follows:
P
'1
2
=L 1(1
"¯PmB
2k")
. (19)
Thus, the next step is to deﬁne the macroscopic probability
¯Pof the process using the known reaction rate constant spec-
iﬁed in the initial macroscopic mechanism. Then the micro-
scopic probability Pfor the DSMC method can be determined
analytically with the use of formula (19) and inverse Laplace
transform properties.
The variation of the surface number density of adsorbed
particles nASis described by the equation
dnAS
dt= KnBnR, (20)
where Kis the reaction rate coefﬁcient of the process, nBis
the volume number density of particles Bcolliding with the
surface and taking part in the considered surface reaction, and
nRis the surface number density of other reagent if it exists
(the number of reagents depends on the reaction type). The
macroscopic probability ¯Pof the process is deﬁned as
¯P=Jreac
B
JB, (21)
where JBis the ﬂux of particles Bincident onto the surface
andJreac
Bis the ﬂux of particles Bincident onto the surface
and taking part in the reaction. The total ﬂux of particles to the
surface in equilibrium can be written as (Ref. 2)
JB=1
4s
8kTg
mBnB, (22)
and the ﬂux of particles to the surface participating in the
reaction can be obtained from Eq. (20)
Jreac
B= dnAS
dt=KnBnR. (23)
Therefore, substituting Eqs. (22) and (23) into formula (21),
we can obtain the required dependence of the macroscopic
probability ¯Pon the gas temperature Tg
¯P=Jreac
B
JB=KnBnR
1
4q
8kTg
mBnB=s
2mB
kTgKnR. (24)
Various impact mechanisms are considered below.1. Adsorption
Let us consider the process of adsorption,
A+S!AS. (25)
Equation (20) describing the change in the surface number
density of adsorbed particles nASis rewritten as
dnAS
dt=KadsnAnS, (26)
where nSis the surface density of free surface sites.
Using Eq. (24), we obtain the macroscopic probability of
the adsorption process
¯Pads=Jreac
A
JA=KadsnAnS
1
4q
8kTg
mAnA=s
2mA
kTgKadsnS
=s
2mA
kTgKadsNSFN
Se, (27)
where NSis the number of free model surface sites on the
surface element with the area Se, i.e., the number of vacant
surface sites on which the model particle can be adsorbed.
2. Eley-Rideal recombination
Let us consider the Eley-Rideal recombination
AS+B!AB+S. (28)
Equation (20) is rewritten as
dnAS
dt= KERnBnAS. (29)
Therefore, Eq. (24) is transformed to
¯PER=s
2mB
kTgKERnAS=s
2mB
kTgKERNASFN
Se. (30)
3. Dissociative adsorption
Let us consider the process of dissociative adsorption
AB+S!AS+B. (31)
Equation (20) is rewritten as
dnAS
dt=Kdisads nABnS. (32)
Therefore, Eq. (24) is transformed to
¯Pdisads=s
2mAB
kTgKdisads nS=s
2mAB
kTgKdisads NSFN
Se.
(33)
Thus, the macroscopic probability of the process for all impact
mechanisms has the form
¯P=s
2m
kTgK (34)
whereis a parameter, which contains information about sur-
face occupation, i.e., the number of free surface sites or the
number of adsorbed particles ( does not depend on the gas 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 7 ---
107105-6 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
temperature Tg) and Kis the reaction rate constant of the pro-
cess under consideration, which depends on the temperature
T; see Eq. (1). We can treat this temperature as the gas temper-
ature Tgor surface temperature Tw. Indeed, under continuum
ﬂow conditions, for which the reaction rate constants are typi-
cally obtained and where they are applied, the gas temperature
can be considered to be equal to the surface temperature.
However, in the procedure described above, Tgis the vari-
able of integration, while Twis constant; therefore, the result
of the procedure application depends on our treatment of the
temperature.
Let us consider two cases: T=TwandT=Tg. In the ﬁrst
case, the reaction rate constant Kis independent of the gas
temperature Tg, i.e., of the variable "deﬁned by formula (17).
It means that Kis a constant in the inverse Laplace transform
(19). In the second case, the opposite situation is observed: K
is not a constant in the inverse Laplace transform.
Thus, if we use T=Twin expression (1) for the reaction
rate constant K(T) in Eq. (19), the microscopic probabilityP(Vn) is determined as
P(Vn)=P
'1
2
=L 1(1
"¯Pm
2k")
=L 1(1
"p
4"K(Tw))
=2pK(Tw)L 1
" 1
2
=2pK(Tw)' 1
2
 1
2H(')
=2pK(Tw)1pVnH
Vn2
=2K(Tw)1
Vn, (35)
where  is the gamma function and His the Heaviside step
function. It is seen from Eq. (35) that the individual probabil-
ity of each impact process P(Vn) is inversely proportional to
the normal to the surface component of the gas-phase particle
velocity and turns to inﬁnity at the zero point [Fig. 2(a)].
However, if we use T=Tgin expression (1) for the reac-
tion rate constant K(T) in Eq. (19), the microscopic probability
P(Vn) is determined in a different way
P(Vn)=P
'1
2
=L 1(1
"¯Pm
2k")
=L 1(1
"p
4"Km
2k"
)
=L 1(
2p" 1
2Am
2k"b
exp 
 2Ea
m"!
)
=2pm
2kb
AL 1
" 1
2 b 
' 2Ea
m!
H 
' 2Ea
m!
=2pm
2kb
A
' 2Ea
mb 1
2
 
b+1
2H2 
' 2Ea
m!
=2p
 
b+1
2m
2kb
A 
Vn2 2Ea
m!b 1
2
H2 
Vn2 2Ea
m!
=8>>><>>>:p
2m
 (b+1
2)kbA
mVn2
2 Eab 1
2,ifmVn2
2>Ea
0,ifmVn2
2Ea. (36)
Note that the derivation of Eq. (36) is correct if Ea>0. Thus, it
is seen from Eq. (36) that the microscopic probability of each
impact process P(Vn) has a different character of the depen-
dence on the gas-phase particle normal velocity as compared
to the previous case [see Figs. 2(b)–2(d)]: the probability is
not equal to zero only if the kinetic energy of the gas-phase
particle along the normal to the surface exceeds the energy Ea;
depending on the value of b, the following options are possible:
(i) the probability has a threshold and turns to inﬁnity ( b<1/2),(ii) it is a step function ( b= 1/2), or (iii) the probability
increases ( b>1/2).
It should be noted that the analytical formulas (35) and
(36) may yield probability values greater than unity, for exam-
ple, near Vn= 0 in the case illustrated in Fig. 2(a), near
Vn=q
2Ea
min Fig. 2(b), and near Vn!1 in Fig. 2(d).
It is well known that a similar problem is inherent in phe-
nomenological models of gas-phase chemical reactions (see,
e.g., Ref. 59). Applying this probability formula directly in
FIG. 2. Microscopic probability of impact processes P(Vn): (a) formula (35); (b) formula (36), b<1/2; (c) formula (36), b= 1/2; (d) formula (36), b>1/2. 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 8 ---
107105-7 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
computations, where its values are compared with the val-
ues of a pseudo-random variable uniformly distributed over
the segment [0,1], one de facto uses a “truncated” probability
function at the level of unity. This means that the probabil-
ity in those regions where the analytical formulas predict its
values greater than unity is assigned the unit value there. As
a result, the number of impact processes in simulations can
be smaller than the number of these processes that could be
expected from the initial reaction rates of these processes. The
size of error associated with probability values greater than
unity depends on the chosen shape of the functional depen-
dence of the probability: Eq. (35) [see Fig. 2(a)] or Eq. (36)
[see Figs. 2(b)–2(d)].
The analysis shows that this error in the case of a thresh-
old determined by Eq. (36) is appreciably higher than that in
the case of Eq. (35), which does not contain a threshold. In
particular, for the model that describes surface reactions on
reaction cured glass (RCG) (see Sec. IV A), the reaction rates
predicted by the threshold-type equation for the probability are
signiﬁcantly lower than the initial value, even if each particle
with a velocity greater than the threshold value reacted (i.e.,
when the reaction probability is a stepwise function equal to
unity for the particle velocity exceeding the threshold value).
It should be also noted that, for gas temperatures near the wall
typical for a continuum ﬂow about a reentry vehicle (below
2000 K), this threshold is several times higher than the mean
thermal velocity of molecules, i.e., only high-energy particles
are involved into the Eley-Rideal recombination, which cannot
be clearly explained on the basis of the physics of the process
in our opinion. Based on the considerations discussed above,
we chose formula (35) for further calculations.
In the case of the Eley-Rideal recombination, as in the
case of Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination, the resultingmolecule can stay adsorbed on the surface or leave the sur-
face after the Eley-Rideal reaction. The gas-phase product of
recombination is reﬂected from the surface diffusely with the
distribution corresponding to the wall temperature Tw. It is also
possible to consider the case on incomplete accommodation
of recombination energy Erecomb similarly to the Langmuir-
Hinshelwood case; in the present paper, however, only the
case of complete accommodation of recombination energy is
analyzed. Hence, as it was stated in Sec. III C, the present
DSMC results provide the maximum value of the heating rate
for a particular ﬁnite-rate reaction mechanism, and the effect
of incomplete recombination energy accommodation should
be addressed in the future.
In the case of dissociative adsorption, the gas phase prod-
uct of the reaction, if it exists, leaves the surface diffusely with
the distribution corresponding to the wall temperature Tw. The
energy required to break the bonds of the incident molecule
in the course of surface dissociation is taken into account in
calculating the heat ﬂux (it makes a negative contribution to
the thermal energy ﬂux to the surface).
C. Implementation in the DSMC method
Let us consider a body surface approximated by a geo-
metrical model composed of ﬂat elements, e.g., triangles in
the 3D case or line segments in the 2D case. In the SMILE++
software system which is used in the present study such ﬂat sur-
face elements are referred as “panels.” All surface processes
are modeled at each surface element separately. Figure 3(a)
illustrates the overall DSMC algorithm including surface pro-
cesses: the impact mechanisms are modeled during each time
step at each event of the collision of a gas-phase particle
with the surface, and the surface mechanisms are modeled
FIG. 3. (a) DSMC scheme including surface processes, (b) scheme of impact mechanisms. 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 9 ---
107105-8 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
collectively at the end of each time step ton each surface
element.
The surface mechanisms (Langmuir-Hinshelwood recom-
bination and desorption) are performed in the following
iterative process:
t=t
while t>0do:
266664LH recombination
t=t tLH
for each A S
if tpanel>tdesdo:
Desorption of A S. (37)
Here tLHis the time of one Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombi-
nation calculated by formula (14), tpanel is the time spent by
the particle on the surface, and tdesis the lifetime of the particle
on the surface calculated by formula (8).
The algorithm for the impact mechanisms (adsorption and
Eley-Rideal recombination) is shown in Fig. 3(b). Each impact
process is performed with a probability P(Vn) depending on
the gas-phase particle energy and obtained in the Sec. III B. In
the case of adsorption, as well as dissociative adsorption, the
gas-phase particle can be captured by the surface element if
there is a free surface site on it; adsorbed particles are deleted
from the gas phase and stored on the surface. In the case of dis-
sociative adsorption, the non-adsorbed product of the reaction,
if it exists, is reﬂected from the surface (it is not shown in the
ﬁgure). In the case of the Eley-Rideal recombination, the part-
ner for the recombination for the gas-phase particle colliding
with some surface element is chosen randomly from parti-
cles adsorbed on the same surface element, and the resulting
molecule is reﬂected from the surface.
IV. DSMC SURFACE CHEMISTRY MODELS
The proposed approach for obtaining DSMC surface
chemistry models was applied to two macroscopic surface
reaction sets: the well-known mechanism of Warnatz et al.
(Ref. 33) of chemical processes on a reaction cured glass
(RCG)-surface in air and the recent mechanism of Kovalev
et al. (Ref. 40) of chemical processes on an -Al2O3-surface
in air. In these macroscopic mechanisms, a ﬁve-species mix-
ture of gases (N, O, N 2, O2, NO) is considered, and a detailed
mechanism of heterogeneous catalytic reactions in dissoci-
ated air is proposed. The reaction rate coefﬁcients are speci-
ﬁed for each considered surface process. These mechanisms
differ not only in the material of the surface to which they
are applied, but also in the method of obtaining the reaction
rate coefﬁcients. In the ﬁrst surface reaction set, the reac-
tion rate constants were obtained from experimental data,
whereas the reaction rate constants in the second set were
obtained on the basis of quantum-mechanical calculations.
The probabilities of the processes can be also obtained by the
method of Ref. 40; however, they were not presented in the
paper.
Note that the present approach can be also applied to
other macroscopic surface reaction sets in a similar manner.A sufﬁcient condition for applying the approach to a surface
reaction set can be formulated as follows: the reaction mech-
anism has to be presented as a set of elementary processes
considered in the Sec. III, and the reaction rate constants of
these processes have to be presented in the Arrhenius form.
A. Catalysis on an RCG-surface, mechanism
of Warnatz et al.
Let us ﬁrst consider the surface reaction set of Warnatz
et al. (Ref. 33) of chemical processes on an RCG-surface in
an air mixture. RCG (reaction cured glass, consists of SiO 2by
94%) is a low catalytic material frequently used for production
of the reusable spacecraft thermal protection system (TPS), for
example, in the space shuttle surface coating. The following
surface processes are taken into account (see Table II): adsorp-
tion of N and O atoms on the surface, formation of N 2, and
O2molecules in the Eley-Rideal and Langmuir-Hinshelwood
recombination (formation of NO is neglected), and desorp-
tion of N and O atoms, and also N 2and O 2molecules that
remain adsorbed after the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombi-
nation from the surface. The reaction rate constants for des-
orption, Eley-Rideal, and Langmuir-Hinshelwood reactions
are deﬁned in the Arrhenius form (1), b= 0; for adsorp-
tion reactions, a constant sticking coefﬁcient S0is speciﬁed.
The parameters for the reaction rate constants and sticking
coefﬁcients are listed in Table II.
Using the approach proposed above, we obtain the char-
acteristic times of the surface processes and the individual
probabilities of the impact processes in DSMC computations
from their reaction rate coefﬁcients.
Fordesorption processes listed in Table II, we calculate
the lifetime of an adsorbed particle on the surface, after which
the particle should be desorbed to the gas phase, according to
Eq. (8)
= ln(Rn)
Kdes. (38)
TABLE II. Parameters of reactions in macroscopic surface reaction set of
Ref. 33. Reproduced with permission from Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf.
Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016 AIP Publishing LLC.
Reaction S0 A E a
Adsorption
N + S!NS 0.1
O + S!OS 0.1
Desorption (1/s) (J)
NS!N + S 7.3 10113.61019
OS!O + S 5 10113.31019
N2S!N2+ S 1 10120.171019
O2S!O2+ S 1 10120.171019
Eley-Rideal (m3/s) (J)
N + N S!N2+ S 0.4 10160.661019
O + O S!O2+ S 1 101611019
Langmuir-Hinshelwood (m2/s) (J)
NS+ N S!N2S+ S 1.16 10102.161019
OS+ O S!O2S+ S 33 10102.661019 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 10 ---
107105-9 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
For each Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination reaction
listed in Table II, the time between two consecutive reactions
is calculated according to Eqs. (14) and (13) by the formula
tLH= ln(Rn)
LH, whereLH=1
2KLHNAS NAS 1FN
Se.
(39)
In the case of adsorption, a constant sticking coefﬁcient
S0is speciﬁed. It means that formula (27) in the model under
consideration has a simpler form
¯Pads=S0=0.1. (40)
Thus, using formula (19) and inverse Laplace transform
properties, we can ﬁnd the microscopic probability Padsof
adsorption for the DSMC method
Pads(Vn)=Pads
'1
2
=L 1(1
"¯Pads)
=L 1(1
"S0)
=S0L 1(1
")
=S0H(')=S0, (41)
i.e., the microscopic probability for each gas-phase particle
colliding with the surface to be adsorbed is equal to the same
given constant sticking coefﬁcient S0.
For the Eley-Rideal recombination reaction, we can cal-
culate the microscopic probability combining Eqs. (35) and
(30). The resulting individual probability of the reaction is
PER(Vn)=2KER(Tw)NASFN
Se1
Vn. (42)
B. Catalysis on an -Al2O3-surface,
mechanism of Kovalev et al.
Let us consider the surface reaction set of Kovalev et al.
(Ref. 40) of chemical processes on an -Al2O3-surface in
an air mixture. Adsorption of nitrogen is neglected in this
mechanism; therefore, only oxygen recombination, as well as
adsorption and desorption, are taken into account. The reac-
tion rate constants for all processes are deﬁned in the Arrhenius
form (1). The full mechanism of surface processes, as well as
parameters for their reaction rate coefﬁcients are presented in
Table III.
Applying the proposed approach to this macroscopic sur-
face reaction set, we obtain the model of surface chemistry on
an-Al2O3-surface in an air mixture for the DSMC method.
TABLE III. Parameters of reactions in the macroscopic surface reaction set
of Ref. 40. Reproduced with permission from Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf.
Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016 AIP Publishing LLC.
Reaction A b E a
Adsorption (m3/s) (J)
O + S!OS 6.310211 6.21021
Desorption (1/s) (J)
OS!O + S 4.8 10110 2.71019
Eley-Rideal (m3/s) (J)
O + O S!O2+ S 5.2 10181/2 0.691019
Langmuir-Hinshelwood (m2/s) (J)
OS+ O S!O2+ 2S 2.7 1070 4.01019The characteristic times of the surface processes and the indi-
vidual probabilities of the impact processes for the DSMC
computations are calculated almost in the same manner as in
the previous case and are presented below. The lifetime of the
adsorbed particle on the surface for the desorption process is
= ln(Rn)
Kdes, (43)
and the time between two consecutive Langmuir-Hinshelwood
recombination reactions is
tLH= ln(Rn)
LH, whereLH=1
2KLHNAS NAS 1FN
Se.
(44)
The microscopic probability of adsorption for the -Al2O3-
model differs from the previous case and is calculated by
combining Eqs. (35) and (27) as
Pads(Vn)=2Kads(Tw)NSFN
Se1
Vn, (45)
and ﬁnally, the microscopic probability of Eley-Rideal recom-
bination is
PER(Vn)=2KER(Tw)NASFN
Se1
Vn. (46)
V. RESULTS OF DSMC COMPUTATIONS
AND DISCUSSION
The molecular models of catalytic processes on different
surfaces proposed above are similar in terms of the numeri-
cal algorithm: the only difference between them is the values
of the reaction rate coefﬁcients. Therefore, these models can
be formulated in a general form. This general model was
implemented in SMILE++, a robust DSMC software system
developed at ITAM, which provides a full cycle of numeri-
cal studies on multiprocessor computers, from deﬁnition of
a three-dimensional geometric model of the vehicle to the
visualization of computational results. The veriﬁcation of the
implemented algorithm is presented below. Then the results
of application of the model to assessing surface catalycity
effects on aerothermodynamics of bodies under reentry ﬂow
conditions are discussed.
A. Veriﬁcation
The following series of computations were performed to
compare the analytical values of the reaction rate constants
with those numerically calculated by SMILE++ in the condi-
tions of thermally equilibrium gas with temperature equal to
the surface one (both gas and surfaces gas temperature was
denoted here by T). Due to the fact that the DSMC model
parameters are obtained under these thermal equilibrium con-
ditions from the known macroscopic rates, one should expect
almost exact agreement of the DSMC results with the theory if
the DSMC model was implemented correctly. The veriﬁcation
was performed for the case of oxygen processes on an RCG
surface (in terms of the numerical algorithm, the cases of all
gases and surface materials are similar). The DSMC calcula-
tions were performed for a 2D square computational domain
with three specular boundaries (left, top, and bottom) and 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 11 ---
107105-10 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
one diffuse wall (placed at the right of the domain) on which
the considered RCG-surface processes (see Table II) were
modeled. The computational domain was ﬁlled with atomic
oxygen. The gas pressure was 4 Pa, and the temperature T
was varied from the minimum (700 K) to maximum (2000 K)
value in steps of 100 K. A separate DSMC computation was
carried out for each value of the temperature.
Figure 4(a) shows the desorption rate constant for atomic
oxygen. In this DSMC calculation, only the desorption pro-
cess was modeled and the other three surface processes were
neglected. At the start of each computation, a set of adsorbed
particles was generated on the surface. During the computa-
tion, desorption of particles from the surface was performed
after each time step, and the lifetime of each particle on the
surface was calculated. These values were sampled to calcu-
late the mean lifetime ¯ of particles on the surface and the
frequency of desorption des, which is equal to the desorption
rate constant Kdes[Eq. (7)],
Kdes=des=1
¯. (47)Note that no other surface processes were modeled in compu-
tations, which means that new particles did not appear on the
surface by adsorption and did not disappear from the surface
in the Eley-Rideal or Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
reactions.
The Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination rate constant
for the O S+ O S!O2S+ S reaction on an RCG-surface is
presented in Fig. 4(b). In the DSMC calculations, only the
Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination was considered: the
impact processes and desorption were not modeled. At the start
of each computation, a set of adsorbed particles was generated
on the surface ( NOSmodel particles). During the computation,
the number of accepted Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombina-
tion events on the wall was sampled after each time step, but the
reactions were not modeled, i.e., the adsorbed particles gener-
ated in the beginning of the calculation were not removed from
the surface and did not appear on the surface either because the
adsorption process was neglected and, hence, NOSremained
constant. At the end of each computation, the mean number
¯NLHof accepted recombination events per time step twas
FIG. 4. Comparison of the calculated and analytical reaction rate constants for oxygen processes on the RCG-surface: (a) desorption rate coefﬁcient; (b) Langmuir-
Hinshelwood recombination rate coefﬁcient; (c) adsorption-desorption equilibrium constant; (d) Eley-Rideal recombination rate coefﬁcient. Reproduced with
permission from Molchanova (Shumakova) et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1628 , 131 (2014). Copyright 2016 AIP Publishing LLC. 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 12 ---
107105-11 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
calculated, and then the frequency of recombination LHand
the reaction rate constant KLHwere obtained using Eq. (13):
KLH=LH2
NOS NOS 1Swall
FN=¯NLH
t2
NOS NOS 1Swall
FN
(48)
(Swallis the surface area).
The adsorption-desorption equilibrium constant KADfor
atomic oxygen is presented in Fig. 4(c). In the DSMC calcu-
lations, desorption and adsorption without any recombination
were modeled. In that case, the surface was empty at the begin-
ning of each DSMC computation, and the mean number of
model particles adsorbed on the surface ¯NOSwas calculated
during the computation after reaching the steady state. The
analytical value of the equilibrium constant KADis deﬁned
by formula (50) derived from the chemical kinetics equation
(49) describing the equilibrium adsorption-desorption process
O + SOSwith the use of the Arrhenius form of the
desorption constant
dnOS
dt=S01
4s
8kT
mOnO KdesnOS=KadsnO KdesnOS=0,
(49)
KAD=Kads
Kdes=S01
4q
8kT
mO
Kdes=S0
Adess
k
2mOT1
2exp Edes
kT!
.
(50)
The numerical value of the equilibrium constant KADin the
DSMC computations is calculated by (51), which follows
from Eq. (49), with the calculated mean number of adsorbed
particles being ¯NOS
KAD=nOS
nO=¯NOS
nOFNmO
Swall. (51)
Figure 4(d) shows the Eley-Rideal recombination rate
constant for the O + O S!O2+ S reaction on an RCG-surface.
In the DSMC calculations, all the surface processes except for
the Eley-Rideal recombination were neglected. As in the ﬁrst
two series of computations, NOSadsorbed model particles were
generated on the surface at the beginning of each computation.
During the computation, the number of all collisions with the
surface Ncolland the number of accepted Eley-Rideal recom-
bination events NERwere sampled, but the reactions were not
performed, i.e., adsorbed particles were not removed from the
surface and gas-phase particles were reﬂected from the sur-
face without any chemical changes according to the diffuse
reﬂection law (it means that NOSremained constant). Using
these data, the macroscopic probability ¯PERof the Eley-Rideal
recombination was calculated by Eq. (21), i.e., NERdivided
byNcoll, and the Eley-Rideal recombination rate constant was
obtained by using Eq. (30)
KER=s
kT
2mO¯PER1
NOSSwall
FN=s
kT
2mONER
Ncoll1
NOSSwall
FN.
(52)
The results of veriﬁcation are presented in Fig. 4. As
it was mentioned above, in this section the proposed model
was constructed in such a way that it must capture the reac-
tion rate constants under thermal equilibrium conditions. Itis seen that the DSMC method predicts the constants fairly
well for the entire considered temperature range for all surface
processes.
For more comprehensive veriﬁcation of code procedures
that involve surface chemistry, it is necessary to consider as
the test case with simultaneous simulations of all processes
considered above. The test case conditions were identical to
test conditions for the previous situations. Oxygen atoms inci-
dent onto the surface could be adsorbed and participate in
the Eley-Rideal recombination reactions with other adsorbed
atoms of oxygen. In addition to participation in the Eley-Rideal
recombination, the adsorbed atoms could be desorbed and par-
ticipate in the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination reaction.
Oxygen molecules formed in the recombination reaction were
removed from the computation as soon as they left the surface.
As a result, the recombination probabilities were calculated by
the formulas
LH=NLH
Ncoll,=NLH+NER
Ncoll, (53)
wheredenotes the total probability of recombination, LH
is the probability of only Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombina-
tion, Ncollis the number of all collisions with the surface,
andNERandNLHare the numbers of all particles accepted
for Eley-Rideal and Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
reactions, respectively, which were sampled during the compu-
tation. Veriﬁcation was performed through comparisons with
analytical values of these variables for different values of
temperature.
To obtain the analytical values of the total and Langmuir-
Hinshelwood probabilities of recombination, the following
differential chemical kinetics equation (54) deﬁning the sur-
face number density of adsorbed atoms nOSin the macroscopic
surface reactions mechanism of Warnatz et al. was solved
analytically
dnOS
dt=S01
4s
8kT
mOnO KdesnOS KLHnOSnOS KERnOSnO.
(54)
Using the deﬁnitions of LHandERand applying Eq. (2), we
transform the third and fourth terms in the right-hand side of
this equation
KLHnOSnOS=Jreac,LH
O=LHJO=LH1
4s
8kT
mOnO, (55)
KERnOSnO=Jreac,R
O=ERJO=ER1
4s
8kT
mOnO. (56)
Then, substituting the resultant expressions (55) and (56) to the
initial differential equation (54), we obtain the following linear
heterogeneous differential equation with constant coefﬁcients,
which deﬁnes the surface population nOS(t)
dnOS
dt+KdesnOS=s
kT
2mOnO(S0 LH ER). (57) 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 13 ---
107105-12 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
The solution of this equation is the function
nOS=Cexp( Kdest)+s
kT
2mOnO(S0 LH ER)
Kdes, (58)
where Cis an arbitrary constant. Passing in this solution to the
limit as t!1 , we obtain the steady-state value of the surface
population neq
OS
neq
OS=lim
t!1nOS=s
kT
2mOnO(S0 LH ER)
Kdes. (59)
Using Eqs. (55) and (56), we can also obtain the formulas
relating the steady-state values of the recombination proba-
bilitiesLHandERto the steady-state value of the surfacepopulation neq
OS
LH=KLHneq
OS2,
*.
,s
kT
2mOnO+/
-=KLHr
2mO
kTneq
OS2
nO, (60)
ER=KERneq
OSnO,
*.
,s
kT
2mOnO+/
-=KERr
2mO
kTneq
OS. (61)
Substituting Eqs. (60) and (61) into Eq. (59), we obtain the
quadratic equation for neq
OS
KLHneq
OS2+(Kdes+KERnO)neq
OS S0s
kT
2mOnO=0, (62)
whose positive solution is
neq
OS= (Kdes+KERnO)+r
(Kdes+KERnO)2+ 4KLHS0q
kT
2mOnO
2KLH. (63)
Thus, we can obtain the analytical steady-state values of
the recombination probabilities LH,ER, and=LH
+ERby formulas (60) and (61), where neq
OSis determined by
Eq. (63).
The probabilities of the total and Langmuir-Hinshelwood
recombination andLHobtained in the DSMC computations
are compared with their analytical values in Fig. 5 for differ-
ent values of temperature (the gas temperature coincides with
the surface temperature). The calculated and analytical values
are denoted by the red points and blue lines, respectively. The
values of the calculated probabilities are in good agreement
with the analytical results. Based on the data reported in this
section, we can conclude that the general DSMC surface chem-
istry model is implemented into the SMILE++ code correctly.
B. Comparison with ab initio calculation data
The results obtained by using the developed DSMC model
of heterogeneous processes were compared with molecular
FIG. 5. Comparison of the calculated probability of recombination with the
analytical value.dynamic (MD) calculations of Rutigliano et al. (Ref. 60). In
Ref. 60, the calculations of the Eley-Rideal recombination of
oxygen on a -cristobalite surface were performed. The surface
temperature was assumed to be Tw= 1000 K. The probability
of an oxygen atom impinging normally onto the surface to be
involved in the Eley-Rideal recombination on a small unit cell
of the surface crystal lattice was given as a function of kinetic
energy of the atom. However, the data on the reaction rate con-
stant as a function of temperature were not provided, and we
cannot apply the presented model to this case directly. Never-
theless, the data of Ref. 60 can be used with some constraints
to validate the proposed approach for the Eley-Rideal recom-
bination of oxygen on an RCG surface (which consist of silica
by 94%), as given by Eq. (42). In particular, these constraints
are caused by signiﬁcant differences in the materials despite
their similar chemical compositions: -cristobalite illustrates
an ideal case of a regular crystal lattice, whereas RCG has an
amorphous structure. The probabilities were compared with
accuracy to a constant factor used for multiplying the reaction
rate constant in the present model. Thus, we compared the gen-
eral character of the recombination probability dependence on
the impinging atom energy rather than its exact values. The
results of these comparisons are plotted in Fig. 6. We can con-
clude that the behavior of the recombination probability as a
function of the kinetic energy of the gas-phase atom computed
in the present work is in good agreement with the data obtained
inab initio calculations for an ideal crystal surface. It should
be also noted that the results of probability comparisons offer
one more argument for choosing the thresholdless formula of
the recombination probability, which was discussed above in
Sec. III B.
C. 2D ﬂow around a cylinder with surface
catalytic processes
The proposed DSMC surface chemistry models were
used for estimating the surface catalycity effects on a reentry 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 14 ---
107105-13 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
FIG. 6. Comparison of the computed probability of ER-recombination for
oxygen on silica with MD calculations of Ref. 60.
vehicle aerothermodynamics. A 2D ﬂow over a cylinder with
a radius of 1 m was simulated numerically for the condi-
tions, corresponding to the point of the atmospheric reen-
try trajectory at the altitude of approximately 85 km (see
Table IV). This test case was considered in Ref. 19. The
Knudsen number, presented in Table IV, is based on the cylin-
der radius. The variable soft sphere model of Ref. 61 was
used for the elastic collisions. The Larsen—Borgnakke model
(Ref. 57) with temperature-dependent vibrational collision
number correction of Ref. 62 was employed for rotational-
translational and vibrational-translational energy transfer. The
kinetic mechanism of Ref. 63, which includes 19 dissocia-
tion and exchange reactions for 5 species: N, O, N 2, NO, and
O2and the total collision energy model (Ref. 2) was used to
take into account gas-phase chemical reactions. The gas-phase
recombination was neglected which is a reasonable assump-
tion for the low pressures typical of high-altitude reentry ﬂows.
More details on the DSMC modeling of elastic and inelastic
collisional processes and model parameters can be found in
Ref. 19.
The parameters of the DSMC method have been chosen
to provide numerically accurate results of the simulation. The
chosen time step of 250 ns was signiﬁcantly lower than the
mean collision time in almost entire computational domain.
The collisional grid was automatically adapted in the dense
regions of the ﬂow to ensure that the ﬂowﬁeld is resolved to
the length scales less than the local mean free path. About
2.5106of simulated molecules and about 400 thousand col-
lisional cells were used in a typical computations. The number
of simulated molecules in a virtual volume with the linear
TABLE IV . Free-stream conditions. Reproduced with permission from
Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016
AIP Publishing LLC.
Knudsen number 0.01
Velocity V(m/s) 7810
Density(kg/m3) 5.66 106
Flow temperature Tg(K) 178.2
Mole fraction of N 2 0.775
Mole fraction of O 2 0.204
Mole fraction of O 0.021size equal to the local mean free path was greater than unity
in the whole computational domain which ensures numeri-
cally accurate results for the DSMC modeling (Ref. 64). The
computations with a larger time step and smaller number
of simulated molecules and collisional cells provided results
nearly identical to those obtained with the mentioned reference
parameters.
The general ﬂowﬁeld structure is demonstrated by the
translational temperature ﬂowﬁeld presented in Fig. 7. The
ﬂow direction is from left to right, and the origin is located at
the stagnation point. To assess the effect of surface chemistry,
four types of surfaces were considered:
Non-catalytic surface, where surface recombination
does not occur at all;
Fully catalytic surface, on which all atoms colliding
with the surface take part in reactions of recombination
(the model Ref. 46 was employed);
Two types of partially catalytic surfaces, on which
surface processes were modeled with the present
approach.
The fully catalytic surface was modeled by the simple
surface chemistry model (Ref. 46) with a speciﬁed constant
probability of recombination =N=O= 1; in this model,
the Eley-Rideal and Langmuir mechanism are not distin-
guished, desorption is not modeled, and the adsorption process
is coupled with recombination. The fully catalytic surface,
as well as the non-catalytic surface, is taken into account
to assess the maximum contribution of surface catalysis to
aerothermodynamics.
Two cases of partially catalytic surfaces represent real
materials, RCG and -Al2O3, which are usually used in ther-
mal protection systems. They were modeled by the proposed
DSMC surface chemistry models based on the macroscopic
surface reaction sets of Warnatz et al. (RCG-surface, Ref. 33)
and Kovalev et al. (-Al2O3-surface, Ref. 40).
A diffuse reﬂection law with full accommodation of
energy was used in all four cases for modeling the parti-
cle/surface interaction without any surface chemical conver-
sions. Full accommodation of reaction energy was assumed
in heterogeneous recombination simulations. The surface
temperature was assumed to be equal to 1000 K.
FIG. 7. Temperature ﬂow ﬁeld. Reproduced with permission from
Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016
AIP Publishing LLC. 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 15 ---
107105-14 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
FIG. 8. Mass fraction of the components along the stagnation streamline: (a) N 2; (b) O 2. Reproduced with permission from Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc.
1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016 AIP Publishing LLC.
The mass fractions of N 2and O 2along the stagnation
streamline for all types of surfaces are presented in Figs. 8(a)
and 8(b), respectively. The red lines are used in the case of the
fully catalytic surface, the blue lines refer to the non-catalytic
surface, and the black and green lines illustrate the cases of the
RCG and -Al2O3materials, respectively. The temperature in
the shock wave (Fig. 7) increases above 10 000 K, which leads
to reactions of dissociation in the gas phase. In turn, dissocia-
tion leads to a decrease in temperature behind the bow shock
front. It is seen in Fig. 8 that the mass fraction of N 2decreases
due to dissociation almost by 2 times, and the mass fraction
of O 2decreases to zero, i.e., O 2molecules totally dissociate.
For the catalytic cases, the mass fraction starts to increase in
the vicinity of the stagnation point because of surface recom-
bination. A small increase in the N 2mass fraction near the
stagnation point can be seen in the non-catalytic case as well.
It can be explained by diffusion effects. The mass fraction of
N2increases almost up to its initial free-stream value in the
fully catalytic case, and the plots for the fully catalytic sur-
face and the model for the RCG material are close to each
other: the difference between the stagnation point values is
about 5%. The plot for the - Al 2O3material is located in the
middle between these curves and the plot for the non-catalytic
surface. The difference between the plots of the O 2mass frac-
tion for the fully catalytic case and the models proposed in the
present work is greater and reaches 2 times at the stagnation
point in the case of the RCG material and 10 times in the case
of the - Al 2O3material.
The probabilities of the Eley-Rideal and Langmuir-
Hinshelwood recombination reactions ( ERandLH, respec-
tively), as well as the total probabilities of recombination 
calculated with the proposed DSMC models are presented for
both N and O components in Table V. Under these free-stream
conditions, the total probability of recombination on the RCG
material for both components is about 0.1, and the majority
of recombination events occur by the Langmuir-Hinshelwood
mechanism (about 75% for nitrogen and 83% for oxy-
gen). For the -Al2O3material, only oxygen recombinationis considered, and the total probability of recombination is
approximately 4 times lower than that in the case of the
RCG surface; almost all recombination events occur by the
Eley-Rideal mechanism.
The calculated heat transfer coefﬁcients Chfor all four
types of surfaces are presented in Table VI. The table contains
the total values of the heat transfer coefﬁcients Chin the second
column, their percentage values relative to the coefﬁcient for
the fully catalytic surface Ch,FCin the third column, and the
percentage values of the surface recombination contribution
to the heat ﬂux Ch Ch,FCrelative to the maximum possible
contribution Ch,FC Ch,NC, where Ch,NCis the heat transfer
coefﬁcient for the non-catalytic surface, in the last column (the
percentage value of the contribution is 0 for the non-catalytic
surface and 100 for the fully catalytic surface). These data
also demonstrate the well-known fact (Ref. 4) of the nonlinear
dependence of the heat ﬂux on the recombination probability
: even small values of the surface recombination probability
(0.1 in the considered case) strongly affect the heat ﬂux to
the surface—the contribution is 82% of the maximum possible
contribution in the RCG model and 25% of the maximum
possible contribution in the - Al 2O3model.
Figure 9 shows the heat transfer coefﬁcient distribution
over the cylinder surface for all four cases: the fully catalytic
case is represented by the red line, the non-catalytic surface is
shown by the blue line, and the RCG and - Al 2O3surfaces are
TABLE V . Probabilities of recombination for different DSMC models.
Reproduced with permission from Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 ,
040010 (2016). Copyright 2016 AIP Publishing LLC.
RCG -Al2O3
Probability of recombination N O N O
 0.118 0.109 0 0.027 572
LH 0.080 0.084 0 1.3 106
ER 0.038 0.025 0 0.027 571 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 16 ---
107105-15 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
TABLE VI. Heat transfer coefﬁcient. Reproduced with permission from
Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright 2016
AIP Publishing LLC.
Type of surface ChCh
Ch,FC(%)Ch Ch,NC
Ch,FC Ch,NC(%)
Fully catalytic 0.133 100 100
RCG 0.120 90 82
-Al2O3 0.078 59 25
Non-catalytic 0.060 45 0
FIG. 9. Heat transfer coefﬁcient along the surface. Reproduced with permis-
sion from Molchanova et al. , AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016). Copyright
2016 AIP Publishing LLC.
illustrated by the black and green lines, respectively ( lis the
length along the cylinder surface measured from the stagnation
point). All graphs have a maximum at the stagnation point and
monotonically decrease. It is also seen that the graph for the
RCG material is close to the graph for the fully catalytic case,
and the graph for the -Al2O3material is located lower than
both of them and closer to the non-catalytic case.
Thus, the surface catalycity models developed on the
basis of the proposed approach can be easily implemented in
the DSMC code. Veriﬁcation performed in the present study
demonstrates that these models were correctly implemented
in the SMILE++ software system. Comparisons with ab ini-
tiocalculations show that the proposed approach adequately
predicts the functional dependence of the recombination prob-
ability on the incident atom energy for some particular cases.
The results of test computations of the ﬂow around a blunted
body under high-altitude reentry conditions show that surface
catalytic processes can produce a signiﬁcant effect on the ther-
mal loads on the vehicle surface for TPS materials with low
catalytic activity even for sufﬁciently high Knudsen numbers
(Kn0.01).
VI. CONCLUSIONS
A new approach was proposed for surface chemistry sim-
ulations within the framework of the DSMC method. On
the one hand, this method takes into account the large vari-
ety of surface processes (adsorption, desorption, dissociative
adsorption, Eley-Rideal and Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombi-
nation); on the other hand, the DSMC method is ideologicallyclose to the phenomenological approach of determining the
microscopic properties of molecular interaction on the basis of
input macroscopic data on ﬁnite rates of the processes, which
is used for modeling gas-phase processes in the DSMC method
(e.g., in the TCE model).
The approach was applied to two macroscopic mecha-
nisms of surface catalytic processes on bodies in an air mixture:
the surface reaction set of Warnatz et al. for the RCG mate-
rial and the surface reaction set of Kovalev et al. for the
-Al2O3material. The microscopic parameters of the DSMC
model, such as the individual probabilities of the Eley-Rideal
recombination and adsorption depending on the surface tem-
perature, the surface density of adsorbed atoms, and the energy
of gas-phase particles colliding with the surface, as well as
the frequencies of the Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination
and desorption depending only on the surface temperature and
surface density of adsorbed atoms, were obtained analytically
from given macroscopic reaction rate constants. The devel-
oped DSMC models were implemented into the SMILE++
software system, veriﬁed by analytical parameters, such as
given reaction rate coefﬁcients and analytical solutions for
thermal equilibrium conditions, and validated against ab ini-
tioresults; reasonable agreement between the calculations and
theab initio data was observed for the energy dependence of
the Eley-Rideal reaction probability.
The constructed DSMC surface chemistry models were
applied to investigate aerothermodynamics of a 2D cylinder in
real ﬂight conditions, taking into account surface catalytic pro-
cesses. It was found that about 0.1 of all atoms colliding with
the RCG surface participate in surface recombination reac-
tions, and most reactions occur by the Langmuir-Hinshelwood
mechanism for both nitrogen and oxygen atoms. For the
-Al2O3surface, the probability of recombination is about 4
times smaller, and almost all recombination reactions occur by
the Eley-Rideal mechanism. The mass fractions of molecular
nitrogen and oxygen were considered. It was noticed that the
graphs for the fully catalytic surface and for the RCG model in
the case of nitrogen are close to each other, and the difference
between them is about 5% at the stagnation point, whereas
this difference for the case of oxygen is more discernible and
reaches 1.5 times at the stagnation point. The results for the
-Al2O3surface show a lower degree of recombination, and
the mass fraction graphs are closer to the non-catalytic case.
The total heat ﬂux to the surface was assessed. In the case of
the RCG material, the total heat ﬂux is twice greater than the
heat ﬂux in the non-catalytic case and is 90% of the heat ﬂux
in the case of the fully catalytic surface; however, in the case
of the -Al2O3material, the total heat ﬂux is lower: 59% of
the heat ﬂux to the fully catalytic surface. Thus, the computed
data show that the contribution of surface catalytic processes
to the total heat ﬂux at the surface and the mixture composi-
tion is signiﬁcant even for small values of the recombination
probability.
The proposed approach without any signiﬁcant modiﬁca-
tions can be used for constructing a DSMC surface chemistry
model on the basis of an arbitrary ﬁnite-rate surface reaction
set. For this reason, the approach is applicable to all mixtures
and surface materials for which surface reaction sets are avail-
able in the literature. Though the input reaction set can be 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 17 ---
107105-16 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
obtained from experimental data in the continuum ﬂow regime,
the corresponding DSMC surface chemistry model can be also
used in strongly rareﬁed nonequilibrium gas ﬂows.
The approach is sufﬁciently simple for numerical imple-
mentation; in particular, it was formulated as a set of analytical
formulas, which are common for various gases and surface
materials. Thus, the proposed approach ensures a reasonable
compromise between the simplicity, generality, and level of
detail necessary for real aerospace applications.
An important feature of the approach should be noted:
it allows one to develop DSMC surface chemistry mod-
els completely consistent with macroscopic data, which can
be used in continuum computations. This feature ensures a
meaningful cross-veriﬁcation between the DSMC and NS
codes. Moreover, this consistency gives grounds to extend-
ing this approach for applications in DSMC/continuum hybrid
codes.
The approach has some constraints because of its phe-
nomenological nature. The degree of reliability of the prob-
ability dependences on energy used in this approach can be
evaluated only by using comparisons with results of experi-
ments and ab initio calculations of such dependences, which
are usually unavailable. Therefore, further validation of the
approach with the use of the best available data is needed.
The future studies should also address the effect of incom-
plete recombination energy accommodation and application
of the proposed approach to macroscopic models taking into
account the heterogeneous production of NO, which may have
signiﬁcant effect on the spacecraft aerothermodynamics (see,
e.g., Refs. 65 and 66).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are deeply grateful to Dr. Anton Shershnev
for his help with preparing the paper. The work was supported
by the Russian Science Foundation (Grant No. 17-19-01375).
This support is gratefully acknowledged.
1W. E. Hammond, Design Methodologies for Space Transportation
Systems (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reston,
Virginia, 2001).
2G. A. Bird, Molecular Gas Dynamics and the Direct Simulation of Gas
Flows (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994).
3L. A. Anderson, “Effect of surface catalytic activity on stagnation heat-
transfer rates,” AIAA J. 11(5), 649 (1973).
4V . L. Kovalev and A. F. Kolesnikov, “Experimental and theoretical simula-
tion of heterogeneous catalysis in aerothermochemistry,” Fluid Dyn. 40(5),
669 (2005).
5G. V . Candler, H. B. Johnson, I. Nompelis, V . M. Gidzak, P. K. Subbareddy,
and M. Barnhardt, AIAA Paper 2015-1893, 2015.
6CFD-FASTRAN, Theory Manual, 2007.
7P. A. Gnoffo, R. N. Gupra, and J. L. Shinn, NASA-TP-2867, 1989.
8L. C. Scalabrin and I. D. Boyd, AIAA Paper 2005-5203, 2005.
9L. Walpot, Ph.D. thesis, T.U. Delft University, 2002.
10S. T. Surzhikov, “Three-dimensional computer model of nonequilibrium
aerophysics of the spacecraft entering in the Martian atmosphere,” Fluid
Dyn. 46(3), 490 (2011).
11G. V . Shoev, Ye. A. Bondar, G. P. Oblapenko, and E. V . Kustova, “Develop-
ment and testing of a numerical simulation method for thermally nonequi-
librium dissociating ﬂows in ANSYS Fluent,” Thermophys. Aeromech.
23(2), 151 (2016).
12C. Park, Nonequilibrium Hypersonic Aerothermodynamics (John Wiley
and Sons, New York, 1990).13G. A. Bird, in 12th International Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics
(RGD) (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, New York,
1981), p. 239.
14P. Nizenkov, M. Pfeiffer, A. Mirza, and S. Fasoulas, “Modeling of chem-
ical reactions between polyatomic molecules for atmospheric entry sim-
ulations with direct simulation Monte Carlo,” Phys. Fluids 29, 077104
(2017).
15I. Borges Sebasti ˜ao and A. Alexeenko, “Consistent post-reaction vibra-
tional energy redistribution in DSMC simulations using TCE model,”
Phys. Fluids 28, 107103 (2016).
16B. L. Haas and I. D. Boyd, “Models for direct Monte Carlo simulation of
coupled vibration–dissociation,” Phys. Fluids 5(2), 478 (1993).
17I. D. Boyd and T. E. Schwartzentruber, Nonequilibrium Gas Dynam-
ics and Molecular Simulation (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2017).
18Ye. A. Bondar and M. S. Ivanov, AIAA Paper 2007-614, 2007.
19Ye. A. Bondar, A. A. Shevyrin, Y . S. Chen, A. N. Shumakova, A. V .
Kashkovsky, and M. S. Ivanov, “Direct Monte Carlo simulation of high-
temperature chemical reactions in air,” Thermophys. Aeromech. 20(5),
553 (2013).
20B. S. Baikov, D. K. Bayalina, E. V . Kustova, and G. P. Oblapenko, “Inverse
Laplace transform as a tool for calculation of state-speciﬁc cross sections
of inelastic collisions,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1786 , 090005 (2016).
21K. Koura, “A set of model cross sections for the Monte Carlo simulation
of rareﬁed real gases: Atom–diatom collisions,” Phys. Fluids A 6, 3473
(1994).
22D. C. Wadsworth and I. J. Wysong, “Vibrational favoring effect in DSMC
dissociation models,” Phys. Fluids 9, 3873 (1997).
23S. Gimelshein and I. Wysong, “DSMC modeling of ﬂows with recombina-
tion reactions,” Phys. Fluids 29, 067106 (2017).
24Ye. Bondar, G. Markelov, S. Gimelshein, and M. Ivanov, “Numerical
modeling of near-continuum ﬂow over a wedge with real gas effects,”
J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer 20(4), 699 (2006).
25I. Wysong, S. Gimelshein, Y . A. Bondar, and M. S. Ivanov, “Compar-
ison of direct simulation Monte Carlo chemistry and vibrational mod-
els applied to oxygen shock measurements,” Phys. Fluids 26(4), 043101
(2014).
26A. A. Shevyrin, Y . A. Bondar, S. T. Kalashnikov, V . I. Khlybov, and
V . G. Degtyar, “Direct simulation of rareﬁed high-enthalpy ﬂow around
the RAM C-II capsule,” High Temp. 54(3), 383 (2016).
27G. A. Bird, AIAA Paper No. 89–1882, 1989.
28I. D. Boyd, “Modeling of associative ionization reactions in hypersonic
rareﬁed ﬂows,” Phys. Fluids 19, 096102 (2007).
29G. A. Bird, “DSMC simulations of shock tube experiments for the
dissociation rate of nitrogen,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1501 , 595 (2012).
30S. Gimelshein, I. Wysong, Ye. Bondar, and M. Ivanov, “Accuracy analysis
of DSMC chemistry models applied to a normal shock wave,” AIP Conf.
Proc. 1501 , 637 (2012).
31I. D. Boyd, “Computation of hypersonic ﬂows using the direct simulation
Monte Carlo method,” J. Spacecr. Rockets 52(1), 38 (2015).
32I. B. Sebastiao, M. Kulakhmetov, and A. Alexeenko, “DSMC study
of oxygen shockwaves based on high-ﬁdelity vibrational relaxation and
dissociation models,” Phys. Fluids 29, 017102 (2017).
33O. Deutschmann, U. Riedel, and J. Warnatz, “Modeling of nitrogen and
oxygen recombination on partial catalytic surfaces,” J. Heat Transfer 117,
495 (1995).
34M. Cacciatore, M. Rutigliano, and G. D. Billing, “Eley-Rideal and
Langmuir-Hinshelwood recombination coefﬁcients for oxygen on silica,”
J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer 13(2), 195 (1999).
35V . L. Kovalev and M. Yu. Pogosbekyan, “Simulation of heterogeneous
atom recombination on spacecraft heat shield coatings using the methods
of molecular dynamics,” Fluid Dyn. 42(4), 666 (2007).
36V . Guerra, “Analytical model of heterogeneous atomic recombination on
silicalike surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 35(5), 1397 (2007).
37V . L. Kovalev, A. A. Krupnov, M. Yu. Pogosbekyan, and L. P. Sukhanov,
“Analysis of the heterogeneous recombination of oxygen atoms on alu-
minum oxide by methods of quantum mechanics and classical dynamics,”
Fluid Dyn. 45(2), 305 (2010).
38A. A. Buchachenko, V . L. Kovalev, and A. A. Krupnov, “Closed model of
oxygen recombination on an Al 2O3surface,” Russ. J. Phys. Chem. B 7(1),
88 (2013).
39A. A. Buchachenko, V . L. Kovalev, and A. A. Krupnov, “Modeling of cat-
alytic activity on an Al 2O3surface on the basis of ﬁrst principles,” Moscow
Univ. Mech. Bull. 68(1), 8 (2013). 10 June 2026 04:54:07


--- Page 18 ---
107105-17 Molchanova, Kashkovsky, and Bondar Phys. Fluids 30, 107105 (2018)
40A. A. Buchachenko, V . L. Kovalev, and A. A. Krupnov, “Rate coefﬁ-
cients of the elementary stages of heterogeneous catalytic recombination
of dissociated air on thermal-protective coatings,” Fluid Dyn. 50(3), 453
(2015).
41F. Bergemann, in Proceedings of the 19th International Symposium on
Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics (RGD) (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995),
p. 947.
42R. S. Simmons and R. G. Lord, in Proceedings of the 20th International
Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics (RGD) (Peking University Press,
Beijing, 1997), p. 416.
43I. Choquet, “A new approach to model and simulate numerically surface
chemistry in rareﬁed ﬂows,” Phys. Fluids 11, 1650 (1999).
44S. F. Gimelshein, D. A. Levin, and R. J. Collins, “Modeling of glow
radiation in the rareﬁed ﬂow about an orbiting spacecraft,” J. Thermophys.
Heat Transfer 14, 471 (2000).
45V . L. Kovalev, V . Yu. Sazonenko, and A. N. Yakunchikov, “Dynamic
Monte Carlo simulation of surface recombination,” Moscow Univ. Mech.
Bull. 62(2), 53 (2007).
46A. N. Shumakova, Ye. A. Bondar, A. V . Kashkovsky, A. A. Shevyrin, and
M. S. Ivanov, AIAA Paper 2014–0699 (2014).
47A. N. Molchanova (Shumakova), A. V . Kashkovsky, and Ye. A. Bondar,
“A Detailed DSMC surface chemistry model,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1628 , 131
(2014).
48A. N. Molchanova, A. V . Kashkovsky, and Ye. A. Bondar, “Effect of
surface catalycity on high-altitude aerothermodynamics of reentry vehi-
cles,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1770 , 040010 (2016).
49A. V . Kashkovsky, Ye. A. Bondar, G. A. Zhukova, M. S. Ivanov, and
S. F. Gimelshein, “Object-oriented software design of real gas effects for
the DSMC method,” AIP Conf. Proc. 762, 583 (2005).
50M. S. Ivanov, A. V . Kashkovsky, P. V . Vashchenkov, and Ye. A. Bondar,
“Parallel object-oriented software system for DSMC modeling of high-
altitude aerothermodynamic problems,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1333 , 211 (2011).
51M. Ivanov, A. Kashkovsky, S. Gimelshein, G. Markelov, A. Alexeenko,
Y . Bondar, G. Zhukova, S. Nikiforov, and P. Vashenkov, in Proceed-
ings of 25th International Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics (RGD)
(Publishing House of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, Novosibirsk, 2006), p. 21.
52H. R. Skullerud, “The stochastic computer simulation of ion motion in a
gas subjected to a constant electric ﬁeld,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 1, 1567
(1968).
53K. Koura, “Null-collision technique in the direct-simulation Monte Carlo
method ,” Phys. Fluids 29, 3509 (1986).54M. S. Ivanov and S. V . Rogasinsky, “Analysis of numerical techniques of
the direct simulation Monte Carlo method in the rareﬁed gas dynamics,”
Sov. J. Numer. Anal. Math. Model. 3(6), 453 (1988).
55K. L. Carleton and W. J. Marinelli, “Spacecraft thermal energy
accommodation from atomic recombination,” J. Thermophys. Heat
Transfer 6(4), 650 (1992).
56M. Balat-Pichelin, J. M. Badie, R. Berjoan, and P. Boubert, “Recombination
coefﬁcient of atomic oxygen on ceramic materials under Earth re-entry
conditions by optical emission spectroscopy,” Chem. Phys. 291(2), 181
(2003).
57C. Borgnakke and P. S. Larsen, “Statistical collision model for Monte
Carlo simulation of polyatomic gas mixture,” J. Comput. Phys. 18, 405
(1975).
58J. Marschall, M. MacLean, P. E. Norman, and T. E. Schwartzentruber, “Sur-
face chemistry in non-equilibrium ﬂows,” in Hypersonic Nonequilibrium
Flows: Fundamentals and Recent Advances , edited by E. Josyula (Ameri-
can Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., Reston, Virginia, 2015),
pp. 239–327.
59Ye. A. Bondar, N. E. Gimelshein, S. F. Gimelshein, M. S. Ivanov, and
I. J. Wysong, “On the accuracy of DSMC modeling of rareﬁed ﬂows
with real gas effects,” AIP Conf. Proc. 762, 607 (2005).
60M. Rutigliano and M. Cacciatore, “Recombination of oxygen atoms on
silica surface: New and more accurate results,” J. Thermophys. Heat
Transfer 30(1), 247 (2016).
61K. Koura and H. Matsumoto, “Variable soft sphere molecular model for
inverse-power-law or Lennard-Jones potential,” Phys. Fluids A 3(10), 2459
(1991).
62N. E. Gimelshein, S. F. Gimelshein, and D. A. Levin, “Vibrational relaxation
rates in the direct simulation Monte Carlo method,” Phys. Fluids 14(12),
4452 (2002).
63M. H. Bortner, “Suggested standard chemical kinetics for ﬂow ﬁeld
calculations—A consensus opinion,” in Automatic Meter Reading and
Control (AMRAC) Proceedings, Part I (Institute of Science and
Technology, University of Michigan, 1966), V ol. XIV , pp. 569–581, Doc.
No. 4613-135-X.
64A. A. Shevyrin, Ye. A. Bondar, and M. S. Ivanov, “Analysis of repeated
collisions in the DSMC method,” AIP Conf. Proc. 762, 565 (2005).
65D. A. Pejakovic, J. Marschall, L. Duan, and M. P. Martin, “Direct
detection of NO produced by high-temperature surface-catalyzed atom
recombination,” J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer 24(3), 603 (2010).
66J. M. Weisberger, M. G. MacLean, R. A. Parker, and P. DesJardin, AIAA
Paper 2013-2643, 2013. 10 June 2026 04:54:07


