ISSN 0015-4628, Fluid Dynamics, 2015, Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 453–462. © Pleiades Publishing, Ltd., 2015.
Original Russian Text © A.A. Buchachenko, V.L. Kovalev, A.A. Krupnov, 2015, published in Izvestiya Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk, Mekhanika
Zhidkosti i Gaza, 2015, Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 160–170.




   Rate Coefficients of the Elementary Stages of Heterogeneous
          Catalytic Recombination of Dissociated Air
                 on Thermal-Protective Coatings
                           A. A. Buchachenko, V. L. Kovalev, and A. A. Krupnov
           Lomonosov Moscow State University, Chemical Faculty, Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics,
                       Institute of Mechanics, Leninskiye Gory 1, Moscow, 119991 Russia
                                        e-mail: valerykovalev@yandex.ru
                                                      Received June 11, 2014



       Abstract—On the basis of quantum-mechanical calculations within the framework of the cluster models
       and the literature data the rate coefficients of the elementary stages of the complete system of heteroge-
       nous catalytic recombination of dissociated air on the surfaces of thermal-protective β -cristobalite and
       α -Al2 O3 ceramic coatings are determined. The processes of impact and associative recombination of
       adsorbed oxygen and nitrogen atoms are taken into account.
       Keywords: reusable thermal-protective coatings of spacecraft, heterogenous catalytic reactions, cluster,
       quantum mechanics, density functional method.
       DOI: 10.1134/S001546281503014X

    Great interest in an investigation of the interaction between multicomponent gas mixtures and low-
catalytic materials is due to the development of reusable spacecraft and promising hypersonic flight ve-
hicles. In high-heat regions of the atmospheric flight trajectory these vehicles are in nonequilibrium flow
and the use of low-catalytic coatings reduces severalfold the heating at the expense of heterogeneous cat-
alytic recombination of atoms. The considerable reduction of heat fluxes makes it possible to diminish the
heat-shielding weight and to increase the payload [1–3].
    In mathematically formulating this problem the catalytic activity of the surface enters in the boundary
conditions for the system of equations governing multicomponent, chemically reacting flow past the surface.
The heterogeneous catalytic recombination effects are usually described by introducing the recombination
coefficients γi which show the fraction of the atoms which take part in recombination on the surface. The
coefficients γi depend on both the surface properties and the gas phase conditions. These dependences
include a great many parameters.
    The very important quantities determining the temperature dependence of the coefficients γi are the rate
coefficients of the elementary stages of heterogeneous catalytic recombination. At an appropriate choice
of the rate coefficients of the elementary stages the kinetic models allowing for the detailed mechanism of
heterogeneous catalytic reactions and based on Langmuir’s theory of adsorbed layers [4] make it possible
to satisfactorily describe the aerodynamic heating of the windward surface of reusable spacecraft along the
entire re-entry trajectory in the Earth atmosphere [1, 3, 5, 6]. However, these coefficients include several
parameters determined from the comparison with the experimental data on the heat fluxes; in the case of a
multiparameter dependence this approach can be ambiguous [7].
    The new approaches based on the methods of quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics allow one to
better understand the mechanism of heterogeneous catalytic processes and to determine the rate coefficients
of elementary processes without invoking the experimental data. In studies [8, 9] the coefficients of oxy-
gen atom recombination and recombination energy accommodation on silicon thermal-protective coatings

                                                                453
454                                           BUCHACHENKO et al.

(β -cristobalite and SiC) were calculated within the framework of classical molecular dynamics using the
potentials of the interaction between oxygen and material atoms available in the literature.
    In [10, 11] heterogenous recombination of oxygen atoms on an aluminum oxide surface was investi-
gated using a semi-classical approach. In this approach the quantum mechanics methods, together with
the density functional theory [12], were applied to determine the potential energy surface corresponding
to the interactions of O(3 P) atoms with a cluster modeling the α -Al2 O3 surface which was then used in
molecular-dynamic calculations.
    In this study, the interaction between dissociated air and thermal-protective β -cristobalite (111) and
α -Al2 O3 ceramic coatings is investigated on the basis of quantum-mechanical calculations. The rate coeffi-
cients of the complete system of the elementary stages of heterogenous catalytic recombination of dissoci-
ated air atoms on these materials are determined with account of adsorption/desorption and the impact and
associative recombination of oxygen and nitrogen atoms.

                            1. MODELING OF THE MATERIAL STRUCTURE
                                  AND ADSORPTION PROCESSES
   In dissociated air on materials under study the detailed mechanism of heterogenous catalytic processes
presented below was taken into account and the rate coefficients of the corresponding elementary stages
were calculated.
   Adsorption/desorption of atoms
                                  kaO , kdO                            kaN , kdN
                      O + (S) ← −− → (O − S),              N + (S) ← −− → (N − S),

   impact recombination of atoms (Eley–Rideal mechanism)
                                    kerO                                       kerN
                  O + (O − S) −− → O2 + (S),               N + (N − S) −− → N2 + (S),
   and associative atom recombination (Langmuire–Hinshelwood mechanism)
                                    klhO                               klhN
                       2(O − S) −−→ O2 + 2(S),             2(N − S) −−→ N2 + 2(S).
    Since heterogenous catalytic reactions on surfaces involve hemosorbed particles, whose bonds with the
surface are due to short-range forces, it is the cluster approach that is rather effective in describing local
interactions. The cluster is a comparatively small fragment of the solid body lattice composed of a finite
number of atoms of the surface layer and near-surface layers. Investigating the interactions with the clus-
ter opens up possibilities for the direct use in calculations of quantum mechanics methods dealing with
molecular systems of restricted dimensions.
    1. The crystal α -Al2 O3 surface was modeled by an Al4 O6 cluster reproducing the crystal stoichiometry
and the valent state of the Al atoms lying on the surface (Fig. 1). To model the adsorption of the oxygen
and nitrogen atoms in the main state (O(3 P), N(4 S)) on the α -Al2 O3 surface the oxygen atoms of the lower
surface of the material were fixed in their positions occupied in the Al4 O6 cluster. The positions of the
other atoms were optimized at given coordinates R, θ , and ϕ of the adsorbed atom (Fig. 1). This model
allows for surface monolayer relaxation due to the interaction between the adsorbent and the adsorbate.
The calculations show the importance of the processes of the structural relaxation of surface atoms. In the
calculations we used the B3LYP functional [13, 14] with the valent-split 6-31G* Pople basis [15]; this choice
was confirmed by the comparison with the experimental data from the earlier authors’ studies [10, 11].
    2. β -cristobalite surface was modeled by the Si-terminated edge (111) of the β -cristobalite under the
assumption of the edge-centered symmetry lattice Fd3m for its ideal crystal, as shown in Fig. 2. It consists
of equilateral triangles united in a hexagon with other Si atoms located on the outer layer of the surface, while
the Si atoms of the second layer occupy the centers of each triangle. To describe adsorption of an outer atom

                                                                FLUID DYNAMICS         Vol. 50   No. 3   2015
                              RATE COEFFICIENTS OF THE ELEMENTARY STAGES                                                   455




       Fig. 1. Cluster model of oxygen atom adsorption on the Al2 O3 surface; I are the Al atoms and II are the O atoms.


we take bridge Si–O–Si structures with Si atoms of the second layer and three bridges to the second-layer
silicon with two Si–O bonds per atom. The structure thus obtained is shown in Fig. 3. It consists of 10 Si
atoms, 12 O atoms, and 15 H atoms which are used for saturating the free surfaces of the cluster. The cluster
possesses the point symmetry C3v and one non-paired electron (total spin of the cluster Sc = 1/2).
    All the calculations were performed within the framework of the method of the density functional theory
with the functional and the basis described below. For an isolated Si10 O12 H15 cluster we considered two
configurations, namely, the “crystalline” one optimized with the constraint of equal lengths of the Si–O
bonds and the “surface” one, in which for inner (Si, O, Si, O) planes were frozen. The second Si surface
and the upper silicon atoms could move along the z direction perpendicular to the surface, while the oxygen
atoms belonging to the first plane were able to consistently move in the z direction and in the vertical
planes of symmetry of the C3v group. The fixed parameters were taken on the basis of crystalline cluster
optimization. The lengths and directions of the artificial Si–H bonds were optimized for the crystalline
cluster and frozen in all last calculations. In the process of adsorption an atom from the gas phase approached
the vertex (Si atom) of the z direction. The cluster optimization in the process of adsorption was made under
the same constraints as for the surface cluster.
    The tests of the accuracy and performance of different gradient-corrected and hybrid functionals were
made on diatomic molecules pertinent to the problem discussed. The O2 , N2 , and NO molecules are the
heterogeneous recombination products, while the SiO molecule qualitatively characterizes the description
of the material structure. A preliminary analysis showed that in using the basis of the same or higher quality
compared with 6-31G* the results much more strongly depend on the choice of the functional than on the
further extension of the basis. Moreover, the calculations showed that the B3LYP functional ensures the
greatest mean accuracy on the molecule and atom set under consideration.


                              2. CALCULATION OF THE RATE COEFFICIENTS
                                     OF THE ELEMENTARY STAGES
   The quantum mechanical calculations gave the necessary information (activation energies and oscillation
frequencies) for using the transitional state theory adapted to the surface reactions [16] in determining the
coefficients of the elementary stages in the Arrhenius form.

   FLUID DYNAMICS           Vol. 50    No. 3     2015
456                                                 BUCHACHENKO et al.




   Fig. 2. Cell of an ideal crystal of β -cristobalite of the Fd3m symmetry (a) and side (111) (b); I are the Si atoms and II are
   the O atoms.

                                                 Hemosorption/Desorption
   The hemosorption rate coefficient can be represented in the form:
                                                              (      )
                                                       s0 (T ) kB T 1/2
                                                   ka = 0               ,
                                                         S      2π m

where S0 is the number of possible adsorption sites on the surface in the units of the inverse area, s0 is the
adhesion coefficient, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and m is the adsorbed atom mass.
    The parameter S0 was calculated from the geometric considerations for a single adsorption cell on the
surface. The adhesion coefficient s0 was estimated statistically under the assumption of direct nonactivated
adsorption [16].
    An analysis of the earlier-made calculations [10, 11] showed that on the α -Al2 O3 surface the oxygen
atom adsorption occurs without a barrier, while its mobility on the cluster-modeled cell is small, owing to a
fairly high diffusion barrier. Therefore, we have

                                                                     qxy
                                                                      a
                                                        s0 (T ) =          .
                                                                    q0 qy0
                                                                     x


                                                                               FLUID DYNAMICS         Vol. 50     No. 3    2015
                               RATE COEFFICIENTS OF THE ELEMENTARY STAGES                                                            457




    Fig. 3. Structure of the β -cristobalite surface (side view); I are the Si atoms, II are the O atoms, and III are the H atoms.


   Here, qxy                                                                                    x       y
            a is the statistical sum of the surface oscillations of the adsorption complex and q0 and q0 are
the statistical sums of the two-dimensional translational motion of a free atom on the cell. The Cartesian
coordinates x and y correspond to the plane passing through the first-layer atoms of neighboring clusters and
z corresponds to the normal to this plane.
   The expressions for the statistical sums are as follows:
                              2π
                       qx0 qy0 =  s0 mkB T,
                              h̄2
                                 (                       )        (                   )
                                      h̄ωx + h̄ωy + h̄ωz            h̄ωx vx + h̄ωy vy
                       qa = exp −
                        xy
                                            2kB T           ∑ exp −       2kB T
                                                                                        ,
                                                           vx ,vy

where ωα are three vibrational frequencies of an oxygen atom adsorbed on the oxygen atom cluster. The
first multiplier allows for the zero oscillation energy, while in the second multiplier the summation is over
all states, whose energy does not exceed the adsorption energy εa0 per molecule.
    Under the assumption of the local equilibrium between the surface and the gas phase the desorption rate
coefficient kd can be expressed in terms of the equilibrium constant of the adsorption/desorption process
                                                     (     )
                                           ka          εa0      qa (T )
                                  K(T ) =      = exp                       NAV,
                                           kd          kB T qS (T )q0 (T )
where qa , qS , and q0 are the total statistical sums of the adsorption complex, the surface, and a free oxygen
atom, respectively, NA is the Avogadro number, and V is the specific volume of the gas phase. In view of the
periodic structure of the surface and the explicit expressions for the translational statistical sums of an atom
[17], we obtain
                                           (      )(           )−1/2
                                              εa0    2π                  qa (T )    NA
                             K(T ) = exp                 mkB T                         ,
                                             kB T    h2              qS (T )q0 (T ) S0
                                                                             el

where qel                                                                                               2S + 1 Lσ
         0 is the electronic statistical sum of an atom calculated in the nonrelativistic approximation
(S and L are the values of the electron spin and orbital angular moments) from the reference data [18] with
account of the statistical weight (2S + 1)(2L + 1).
    Under the assumption that in the interaction with an atom from the gas phase the surface deformation
is local, the ratio qa /qS can be estimated as the ratio of the statistical sums of the two above-mentioned
clusters qC–O /qC . In these clusters the oscillational components are important; these were estimated by
direct summation but with account of the frequencies of all 57 and 54 normal oscillations and a constraint
on the states lying below the desorption limit εa0 .

   FLUID DYNAMICS             Vol. 50    No. 3     2015
458                                           BUCHACHENKO et al.

   From an analysis of the numerical investigations performed it follows that in the case of the α -Al2 O3
surface the heterogeneous processes connected with an adsorbed nitrogen atom do not play any considerable
role owing to the negligibly small adsorption energy (0.074 eV). The comparison of the calculated equilib-
rium constants of the absorption of oxygen on α -Al2 O3 and nitrogen on the β -cristobalite surface showed
that for α -Al2 O3 throughout the entire temperature range under consideration the equilibrium is displaced
toward desorption and is controlled by the pre-exponential factor, rather than by the exponential factor itself,
while the equilibrium constant is about ten orders smaller than in the case of true hemosorption. Thus, in
the case of the α -Al2 O3 surface the heterogeneous processes connected with an adsorbed nitrogen atom can
be completely excluded from consideration.

                               Impact Recombination (Eley–Rideal Reaction)
   The rate coefficients of impact heterogeneous atom recombination on the β -cristobalite surface were
calculated on the basis of the molecular- dynamic calculations from the literature [19], where the method of
classical trajectories was used.
   The rate coefficient of the heterogeneous recombination on the Eley–Rideal surface ker can be repre-
sented in the form:                               (      )
                                                    kB T 1/2 p(T )
                                       ker (T ) =                  NA .
                                                    2π m      S0
   The writing in the Arrhenius form
                                                                     (       )
                                                                   Eer
                                           ker (T ) = Aer (T ) exp
                                                                   kB T

makes it possible to separate out the pre-exponential factor Aer (T ).
    In [19] on the basis of an investigation of the polymorphic model of the β -cristobalite (100) surface
using the density functional method analytical approximations of the pairwise potentials of the nitrogen
atom interaction with the surface were derived and used to determine the value of the energy barrier of
the Eley–Rideal recombination reaction (0.1 eV) and to perform the molecular-dynamic calculations of
the recombination probability. The check showed that the potentials presented in [19] fairly adequately
approximate the cluster model data and give a very close value of the activation energy for the β -cristobalite
(111) surface. Since in estimating the energy barriers both the approximation accuracy and that of the density
functional method are within a few tenths of an electron-volt, in the calculations the energy activation value
was taken to be Eer = 0.1 eV.
    In [19] the recombination probabilities P(vz ) are given as functions of the velocity vz of an atom nor-
mally incident on the surface. The temperature dependence of these quantities is determined by the integral
transformation with the Maxwellian distribution
                                       (             )1/2 ∫∞             (          )
                                             m                               mv2z
                             P(T ) =                           P(vz ) exp −             dvz ,
                                           2π kB T                          2kB T
                                                          0

where m is the atom mass and kB is the Boltzmann constant.
    The calculations using the density functional method showed that the activation energies of the Eley–Rideal
reaction for nitrogen and oxygen are similar in value. The normalization of the pre-exponential factor by
the atom mass makes it possible to obtain a set of the nitrogen and oxygen recombination rate coefficients
on the β -cristobalite surface.
    The results of the calculations presented in Fig. 4 indicate that the nitrogen recombination is somewhat
more effective than the oxygen recombination, while the effective recombination coefficients on the sides
of the β -cristobalite (100) and (111) almost coincide at the expense of the Eley–Rideal mechanism. In the
figure the rate constant of the oxygen recombination on the (100) surface calculated in [20] on the basis of

                                                                      FLUID DYNAMICS            Vol. 50   No. 3   2015
                             RATE COEFFICIENTS OF THE ELEMENTARY STAGES                                                 459




   Fig. 4. Rate coefficients [cm3 (s mole)−1 ] of heterogeneous oxygen and nitrogen recombination in accordance with the
   Eley–Rideal mechanism for two β -cristobalite surfaces: (1) N(111); (2) O(111); (3) N(100); (4) O(100); and (5) O(100)
   from [22].

the periodic model of the surface is also presented. The agreement accurate to the factor of three seems
quite acceptable for the kinetic modeling.
    On the α -Al2 O3 surface the oxygen recombination rate in the Eley–Rideal reaction was calculated in
[10, 11] using the molecular-dynamic method on the basis of the surface of the potential energy of the
interaction between an O atom and the Al8 O12 cluster as a function of the distance between the oxygen
atom and an Al(1) atom and two polar angles Θ and ϕ . In this case, the cluster geometry and the potential
curve of the interaction between an O2 molecule with the Al4 O6 cluster as a function of the distance from the
molecule to the central Al atom were partially optimized. Here, the angle Θ corresponds to the deviation of
the O–Al(1) vector from the normal to the z surface and the angle ϕ describes the position of the projection
of this vector on the xy plane.

                                            Associative Recombination
                                        (Langmuire–Hinshelwood Reaction)
   Assuming that the activation energy of recombination of two atoms with simultaneous desorption of a
molecule is independent of the way of delivering the reactant to the reaction center the recombination rate
coefficient in the Langmuire–Hinshelwood reaction can be written in the form:
                                              (      )
                               vdiff (T )       Eer
                         klh =            exp          , vdiff (T ) = 4S0 NA D(T ),
                                  S0            kB T

where vdiff is the frequency of the oxygen atom jumps between the neighboring adsorption sites.
   In calculating the diffusion coefficient D(T ) we used the empirical scheme in which four clusters are
united into a “rhombus” shown in Fig. 5, while the surface of the potential energy of an oxygen atom was
approximated by the sum of four surfaces of the potential energy of its interaction with each of these clusters
and the Lennard–Jones potentials of its interaction with the O(2) second-layer oxygen atoms [21]. On this
surface the reaction path connecting two nearest Al(1) atoms with the geometric distance between them ρ =
4.529 Å was optimized and the energy at the maximum point was determined, together with its derivatives.
The derivatives correspond to one imaginary and two real frequencies. In view of the symmetry of the
problem, there exist two equivalent paths with maxima at the points (x, y, z) = (2.355, ±1.185, 1.579). The
values of D(T ) were calculated within the framework of activated complex theory [22] using the expression
                                                            ∕=          ( )
                                                    2 kB T q (T )    ED0
                                         D(T ) = ρ               exp       ,
                                                   2π h̄ qq (T )     kB T
   FLUID DYNAMICS           Vol. 50    No. 3    2015
460                                                BUCHACHENKO et al.




   Fig. 5. Model of the α -Al2 O3 (0001) surface; top (a) and side (b) views on a structural element of the surface obtained by
   fourfold translation of the Al8 O12 cluster; I are the Al atoms and II are the O atoms.



where q∕= (T ) is the statistical sum of the transitional state corresponding to a maximum on the reaction path
and ED0 is the diffusion activation energy with account of the zero oscillation energy per one molecule.
Since the model does not take account of surface relaxation in the process of diffusion, in the statistical sum
ratio only the contributions connected with the degrees of freedom of an oxygen atom are not cancelled.
They include two real vibrational frequencies w∕=     i in the directions orthogonal to the reaction path in the
transitional state and three vibrational frequencies ωα introduced above in the adsorption complex. The
corresponding contributions were calculated by direct summation with a constraint on the adsorption energy.
   In modeling the associative recombination processes the data [20] were used for determining the cor-
responding reaction rate for oxygen recombination on the β -cristobalite surface. Their approximation on
the temperature range from 700 to 1700 K gave the values of the pre-exponential factor 1.0 × 108 cm2 /(s
mole) and the reaction activation energy 4.24 eV. The rate coefficient of the associative atom recombination
was calculated using an algorithm of extrapolation in the mass under the assumption that for a particular
surface the diffusion activation energy is determined by the difference of the adsorption energies of atomic
components.
    The recommended values of the rate constants of the elementary stages of the interaction between disso-
ciated air and thermal-protective β -cristobalite and α -Al2 O3 coatings are gathered in the table.

                                                                          FLUID DYNAMICS             Vol. 50    No. 3    2015
                              RATE COEFFICIENTS OF THE ELEMENTARY STAGES                                        461

Table

                                                    β -cristobalite,                        α -Al2 O3 ,
          Rate coefficient                       k = A exp(−E/RT )                     k = A exp(−E/RT )
                                             A                    E, eV            A                  E, eV
   kaN , cm3 (s mole)−1                1.57 × 108T 1.1            0.0      0                          0
   kdN   , s−1                         6.0 × 1010                 3.472    0                          0
   kaO   , cm3 (s mole)−1              1.05 × 108T 1.1            0.0      3.778 × 109T               −0.039
   kdO   , s−1                         2.0 × 1011                 5.051    4.826 × 1011               1.666
   kerN   , cm3 (s mole)−1             1.6 × 1012                 0.047    0                          0
                        −1
                                                                                       √
                 3
   kerO , cm (s mole)                  1.48 × 10   12
                                                                  0.046    3.1061 × 10  T12
                                                                                                      0.43
   klhO , cm2 s−1                      1.0 × 108                  4.24     1.614 × 1021               2.51
   klhN , cm2 s−1                      1.1 × 108                  2.7      0                          0


    Summary. It is shown that under the re-entry conditions the α -Al2 O3 material is a considerably weaker
adsorbate of oxygen and nitrogen atoms, as compared with β -cristobalite. Its surface does not almost keep
nitrogen atoms and weakly adsorbs oxygen atoms. The difference in the atom adsorption energies on the
α -Al2 O3 and β -cristobalite surfaces is greater than 3 eV and is almost independent (within the limits of
0.1 eV) of the adsorbed atom nature.
    On the basis of the quantum-chemical investigations and an analysis and processing of the experimental
and calculated data available in the literature we can recommend the given values of the reaction rates of the
elementary stages of the process of interaction between dissociated air and thermal-protective α -Al2 O3 and
β -cristobalite coatings.
    We note that the energy of oxygen atom desorption from the β -cristobalite surface determined in the
quantum-mechanical calculations is considerably greater than the data available in the literature. By halving
this value good agreement with the experimental data can be obtained.

   The study was carried out with the support of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project No. 14-
01-00310).

                                                        REFERENCES
 1. V.L. Kovalev, Heterogeneous Catalytic Processes in Aerothermodynamics [in Russian], Fizmatlit, Moscow (2002).
 2. R. Goulard, “On Catalytic Recombination Rates in Hypersonic Stagnation Heat Transfer,” Jet Propulsion 28, 737
    (1958).
 3. V.L. Kovalev and A.F. Kolesnikov, “Experimental and Theoretical Simulation of Heterogeneous Catalysis in
    Aerothermochemistry. A Review,” Fluid Dynamics 40 (5), 669 (2005).
 4. I. Langmuir, “Monolayers on Solids,” J. Chem. Soc. 4, 511 (1940).
 5. V.L. Kovalev, A.F. Kolesnikov, A.A. Krupnov, and M.I. Yakushin, “Analysis of Phenomenological Models De-
    scribing the Catalytic Properties of High-Temperature Reusable Coatings,” Fluid Dynamics 31 (6), 910 (1996).
 6. G.N. Zalogin and V.V. Lunev, “Catalytic Properties of Materials in a Nonequilibrium Dissociated Air Flow,” Fluid
    Dynamics 32 (5), 654 (1997).
 7. V.L. Kovalev and A.A. Krupnov, “Effect of Nitrogen Oxide Formation in Heterogeneous Catalytic Reactions on
    the Heat Fluxes to the Reusable Spacecraft Surfaces,” Vestn. Mosk. Un-ta. Ser. 1. Mat. Mekh. No. 1, 31 (2004).
 8. V.L. Kovalev and M.Yu. Pogosbekyan, “Simulation of Heterogeneous Atom Recombination on Spacecraft Heat
    Shield Coatings Using the Methods of Molecular Dynamics,” Fluid Dynamics 42 (4), 666 (2007).
 9. V.L. Kovalev and M.Yu. Pogosbekyan, “Analysis of the Catalytic Properties of Thermal-Protective β -Cristobalite
    and SIC Coatings,” Vestn. Mosk. Un-ta. Ser. 1. Mat. Mekh. No. 2, 44 (2009).

   FLUID DYNAMICS            Vol. 50    No. 3      2015
462                                          BUCHACHENKO et al.

10. V.L. Kovalev, A.A. Krupnov, M.Yu. Pogosbekyan, and L.P. Sukhanov, “Modeling the Oxygen Atom Adsorption
    on the Al2 O3 Surface Using the Density Functional Method,” Vestn. Mosk. Un-ta. Ser. 1. Mat. Mekh. No. 4, 58
    (2010).
11. V.L. Kovalev, A.A. Krupnov, M.Yu. Pogosbekyan, and L.P. Sukhanov, “Analysis of Heterogeneous Recombination
    of Oxygen Atoms on Aluminum Oxide by Methods of Quantum Mechanics and Classical Dynamics,” Fluid
    Dynamics 45 (2), 308 (2010).
12. W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, “Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation Effects,” Phys. Rev. A
    140, 1133 (1965).
13. A.D. Becke, “Density-Functional Exchange-Energy Approximation with Correct Asymptotic Behavior,” Phys.
    Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).
14. C. Lee, W. Yang, and R.G. Parr, “Development of the Colle–Salvetti Correlation Energy Formula into a Functional
    of the Electron Density,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 785 (1988).
15. P.C. Hariharan and J.A. Pople, “The Influence of Polarization Functions on Molecular Orbital Hydrogenation
    Energies,” Theor. Chem. Acta 28, 213 (1973).
16. I. Chorkendorf and J.W. Niemantsverdriert, Concepts of Modern Analysis and Kinetics, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim
    (2007).
17. S. Glasstone, K.J. Laidler, and H. Eyring, The Theory of Rate Processes, McGraw-Hill, New York (1941).
18. Y. Radchenko, A.E. Kramida, J. Reader, and N.A. Team, “NIST Atomic Spectra Database (ver. 4.0.1),
    http://physics.nist.gov/asd (2011).
19. M. Rutigliano, A. Pieretti, M. Cacciatore, N. Sanna, and V. Barone, “N Atoms Recombination on Silica Surface:
    A Global Theoretical Approach,” Surf. Sci. 600, 4239 (2006).
20. V. Moron, P. Gamallo. L. Martin-Gondre, C. Crespos, P. Larregarayd, and R. Sayos, “Recombination and Chem-
    ical Energy Accommodation Coefficients from Chemical Dynamics Simulations: O/O2 Mixtures Reacting over a
    Beta-Cristobalite (001) Surface,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 17494 (2011).
21. B. Halpern and D.E. Rosner, “Chemical Energy Accommodation at Catalytic Surfaces,” Chem. Soc, Farad. Trans.
    J. 74, 1833 (1978).
22. G.A. Melin and G.J. Madix, “Energy Accommodation during Oxygen Atom Recombination on Metal Surfaces,”
    Trans. Far. Soc. 67, 198 (1971).




                                                                 FLUID DYNAMICS         Vol. 50   No. 3    2015
